---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


#**Global Mutations of the Viral Image**

###Chloë Arkenbout, Jack Wilson and Daniël de Zeeuw 

Memes are bastards, and we love them for it. But memes are bastards in
the sense that they are born from two seemingly incompatible ontological
registers: an unholy matrimony of semiosis and virality, sense and
nonsense, signification and circulation. More on that later. First,
let's acknowledge that the meme is also an infantile and laughable term,
as are all words that repeat themselves. Yet—encountering its own
stupidity, and making this into its generative principle—it is *not*
ashamed; like any self-respecting idiot savant, it never ceases to
persist in its own convoluted wisdoms. ‘Insanity is doing the same thing
over and over again and expecting different results’, as Einstein’s
scientific earworm had it. Call us crazy then, but last time we checked,
isn’t there difference in repetition? Deleuzean mic-drop.

Notoriously, the meme screws with time, and in this it is pompously and
parodically postmodern. Take the memetic format of the animated reaction
image. Einstein smoking a pipe, *ad infinitum* (fig. 1); the video
timecode permanently skips from the seventh second to the eighth, to the
seventh, to the eighth, tik tok, a historical figure evacuated from
history. Has the viral image exorcized the Barthesian *punctum*? No:
because even when it purifies time from melancholy, it leaves the purely
formal mystery of time intact. And the subject, sucked into its vortex,
and true to its sado-masochistic genealogy, experiences joy at the
spectacle of its own decentering. Ha-Ha.

The meme also screws with narrative, or what could be called the
gentrification of time. A truck about to run into a giant traffic pole,
forever captured from multiple angles. The existential dread of
infinite, contagious suspense: the antithesis of comic relief. Nervous
laughter. Please let it end, a feeling intimately known by those
suffering from an involuntary imperative to repeat: obsessive compulsive
disorder. Wash your hands, turn off the gas, lock the door. Do it again.
They demand from the object a solution, namely to rescue them from the
abysmal tension that is ripping them apart. It’s a kind of magic. It’s a
kind of magic. Repetition without end. The curtain never falls on
everyday life as the substrate of the historical Event, which is
singular and unrepeatable. In the meme, the Event becomes fractured and
folded in a million little fragments scattered throughout asynchronous
time. The world, as Walter Benjamin held, is only slightly, nearly
imperceptibly changed after the arrival of the Messiah. Yet through it,
*everything* becomes different, and therein lies its revolutionary
thrust.

![fig. 1 (https://giphy.com/gifs/pipe-einstein-s5z4Oy4xrezm0)](imgs/0.1.png)

![](media/image2.gif){width="2.9895833333333335in"
height="1.6608792650918636in"}

Fig. 2
[*https://tenor.com/view/truck-crash-gif-10492368*](https://tenor.com/view/truck-crash-gif-10492368)

Memes are also tricksters, as they make us believe we control them while
it’s actually the other way around. Classic Zizek: ‘Memes, misperceived
by us, subjects, as means of our communication, effectively run the
show’.[^02introduction_1] Previous critiques of memetics by pious humanists for not
sufficiently taking agency and meaning-making into account fail to
perceive this radical *copernican turn* in modern scientific thought. To
reject memetics on the basis of its reduction of culture to genetic
principles of evolutionary biology *à la* Dawkins and his semi-religious
atheist followers (how ironic), while superficially legitimate, actually
throws out the meme with the bathwater.

Returning to the meme as the bastard offspring of two different
ontological registers, we could say the meme acts as a medial interface
between asignifying and signifying semiotic systems. For Felix Guattari
and later Maurizio Lazzarato in *Signs and Machines: Capitalism and the
Production of Subjectivity*, asignifying semiotics refers to an
operational system of signs that operates below and without any
reference to human subjectivity, sociality, representation, and
intersubjective meaning, and that extradiscursively acts on human and
non-human entities by controlling the parameters of their existence. In
this reading, the meme traverses and connects two assemblages of
domination: that of social subjection and machinic enslavement. Whereas
the former acts on the level of ideology and interpellation,[^02introduction_2] the
latter instead ‘operates at the level of deterritorialised codes and
non-representational signals where the individual becomes a cog of a
larger machine that reduces all singular content to an abstract value or
axiom’.[^02introduction_3]

The growing prevalence of machinic enslavement over mechanisms of social
subjection must in a large part be attributed to information and
computation technologies. As Gary Genosko notes, in developing his
theory of information, Claude Shannon radically disjoints the notion of
information from that of semantic content, and instead proposes a purely
technical definition.[^02introduction_4] Put dramatically, from a cybernetic
engineering perspective, the meaning of a message seemingly becomes
irrelevant, or at least expelled from the equation. It was this
theoretical challenge put forward by Shannon that Baudrillard took up in
his polemic with the media theorist Hans Magnus Enzensberger.
Questioning the latter’s emancipatory project of a socialist
appropriation of the media, Baudrillard argued that mass media undercuts
representation on a much deeper and more structural level. For him,
media obey a fundamentally different logic than *representation*, namely
that of *simulation*. This is a more radical notion than Debord’s
earlier critique of the society of the spectacle, in that the spectacle
still assumes an underlying reality from which it alienates its
audiences.

Is signification altogether superfluous, then? Does it still matter
*what* the image says, or merely *how* it circulates, e.g. how it is
effectively operationalized in an informational milieu? But perhaps we
should put the question differently: is there *jouissance* in
asignification? Is this perhaps the secret to the meme’s unlikely
success? Noting the traditional link between the image and the level of
representation and ideology, Bueno asks:

> But what if images could also be studied from the non-representational
> and asignifying standpoint of machinic enslavement? Would it be
> possible to forge the notion of asignifying images in similar terms to
> Guattari's concept of asignifying semiotics, that is, as a conceptual
> apparatus that helps grasping the machinic dimension of contemporary
> capitalism?[^02introduction_5]

This is also exactly the question memes pose to us. As Geoff
Hondroudakis argues in his contribution to this reader:

> The significance of circulation and exchange in memes—their
> evolutionary function as asignifying network symbionts—is precisely
> because they mediate signifying content with impersonal scales. The
> particular quality of the online memetic ecology is its inclusion of
> both registers. Meme culture is a process of mediation latticing the
> gulf between the scales of affect and identity, information, and
> social system. (add page no. in final reader)

As they metastasized from the digital periphery to the mainstream, memes
have seethed with mutant energy. From now on, any historical event will
be haunted by its memetic double—just as any pandemic will have its own
infodemic that will recursively act upon it—issuing in the kinds of
cross-contamination that Baudrillard already prefigured in the 1980s:
the convoluted age of simulacra, of epistemological crises associated
with postmodernity, and of a generalized informational obesity whose
gravitational pull bends reality to whatever ‘program’, in the multiple
senses of that term.

![Afbeelding met tekst Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image3.gif){width="2.5in"
height="1.5833333333333333in"}

Fig. 3.
[*https://tenor.com/view/nyan-cat-gif-5716621*](https://tenor.com/view/nyan-cat-gif-5716621)

Enter: a 100 hour-long video of Nyan cat on YouTube. The perverse
delight of endless repetition, the way it tries to make no sense of
nonsense: co(s)mic sameness, semiotic entropy. Repeat a word long enough
and it loses all meaning, leaving a bad taste in your mouth. When
meaning is an effect of the inscription of difference, it makes sense
that repetition undoes sense. Only in laughter do we momentarily glimpse
our own non-knowledge, which is the closest we probably get to reckoning
with it.

Our laughter, then, is precisely our defence against our recognising
nothing. To stare too long at the meme is to see its R'lyehian semiotic
geometry and therein the birth spasms of an alien whose origin may be in
human cultural production but whose form now surpasses our capacities to
even comprehend. The single meme, then, has a concealing function
wherein horror is sublimated into humor, and we only become aware of
this process when it fails: the algorithmic grotesque of ‘BURIED ALIVE
Outdoor Playground Finger Family Song Nursery Rhymes Animation Education
Learning Video,’ ‘Double Pregnant FROZEN ELSA vs DOCTOR! w/ Spiderman vs
Joker Maleficent Hulk Baby - Superhero Fun’ and the myriad other
examples of recombinant YouTube Kids’ grotesquery, the dead eyes of
‘Momo,’ or the psychic terrorism of the ‘Blue Whale Challenge’ that
Anirban Baishya discusses in this collection:

> Memetic terror is an affective, networked fear of breaching. It
> replicates itself through exposure to repeated information,
> reverberating throughout digital infrastructures, as it interacts with
> personal devices, policy, and regulation, as well as users’ bodies.
> (add page no. in final reader)

These moments get their affective charge from witnessing—however
briefly—the seething incomprehensibility from which the meme emerges and
suffuses our being-in-the-world. In many ways, then, the manner in which
the meme covers—or reveals—an apparatus of pure terror is analogous to
the function of the spectres, zombies, and demons who emerge with the
arrival of the deterritorializing forces of global capitalism.[^02introduction_6]
Indeed, this is precisely the thesis of Leslie Braun’s reflection on how
infrastructures of networked communication, extractive capitalism, and
myth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo come to be articulated
together in a viral video of the mystical siren Mami Wata, apparently
captured by Chinese workers laying submarine internet cable.

What this constellation already alludes to is how, as arguably
synonymous with the internet as such, the meme revolves in the orbit of
what Peter Galison has called the ‘ontology of the enemy’.[^02introduction_7] We concur
with his claim that there is a problem with talking about ICT and the
web as if they were not embedded in a military way of organizing things.
This means that in the case of memes, as in the acronym 3C used to
denote military information systems, when we think the C for
communication we must always also at the same time think the other two
Cs: command and control. Paraphrasing Clausewitz’ famous dictum on
politics, we could say that digital communication is the continuation of
war by other means. Hence the vernacular notion of ‘meme warfare’. The
roots of current concerns over Russian disinformation campaigns must
arguably be sought here, in the convergence of military,
communicational, economic, and political apparatuses, rather than in a
supposed erosion, by corporate platforms or malicious deep state actors,
of an otherwise healthy digital democratic public sphere in the
Habermasian sense.

In a presentation at the 2011 Social Media for Defence Summit, the
DARPA-associated researcher Robert Finkelstein described the
possibilities of ‘military memetics’ and how this paradigm might be
deployed in domains as diverse as PSYOPS, counter-intelligence,
recruitment, public relations, and even nuclear deterrence.[^02introduction_8] While we
might take comfort in the feeling that the most successful of these
specific memetic efforts was likely the hysterical injunction to ‘Press
F to pay respects’ (fig. 4) in the video game and US military
recruitment tool *Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare*—that is, as far as we
know (who is to say that the psychic architectures of our corporate
platforms are not aspects of a PSYOP being done to us all?)—this
presentation speaks to the military history and darker side of the meme.
In its spontaneous evocation of laughter—which is classically understood
to bypass subjectivity by acting convulsively on the body itself—is a
prototypical instance of ‘influence’ as a tactical acting at a distance,
changing the psycho-physical makeup of the agents it targets. Acting at
a distance: isn’t that the very definition of media?

![Afbeelding met tekst Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image4.jpg){width="5.448567366579177in"
height="3.064819553805774in"}

Fig. 4

From state actors to insurgents, Memes have proven to be powerful
weapons in informational warfare. Indeed, even the canard that ‘the left
can’t meme’ is a meme unto itself, as Andy King tells us in her essay
‘Weapons of Mass Distraction: Far-right Culture-jamming Tactics in
Memetic Warfare’:

> The alt-right \[...\] have molded their image into that of an underdog
> – a convenient ploy to justify aggressive tactics such as spamming
> pro-choice Facebook groups with images of aborted fetuses, raiding
> subreddits and shitposting cringe compilations of angry feminists and
> liberals appearing to ‘cancel free speech’. Their outreach was far and
> wide – no corner of the internet was spared. (add page no. in final
> reader)

If we move, however, out from under the shadow of memes’ dark side, we
see that they can too be critical acts of positive political
intervention as well. As King says, memetic warfare is more immediate
and accessible than real-life protests; it is not susceptible to police
disruptions and pandemics. Memes are excellent networked objects for
challenging state narratives, executing counter-hegemonic strategies,
and creating a feeling of solidarity as humor is usually one of the few
things those in (abusive) political power cannot repress. For example,
Saeeda Saeed, an activist from Saudi Arabia, devised an Instant Meme
Noise Generator that spews out nonsensical insults to the top 10 Saudi
state-run Twitter accounts in an effort to drown out their posts,
directly influencing the online political discourse.

These counter-strategies, however, are not wholly bound to the online
domain and can have concrete, real-world effects. In ‘Your Feed is a
Battleground: A Field Report of Memetic Warefare in Turkey’, Särp Ozer
explains that memes portraying the former Minister of Finance and
Treasury—Berat Albayrak—as an incompetent dummy caused him so much
humiliation that it prompted his resignation. Memes, like those made by
Anahita Neghabat, a meme maker and activist who criticizes the
right-wing climate of Austria with her Instagram page
@ibiza\_austrian\_memes, highlights how memes are an essential aspect of
collective empowerment strategies that are used by marginalized actors
to build resilience through a process of self-affirmation.

So while we often think of this in terms of memes being used for
destruction, confusion and chaos, they are equally effective as tools in
designing a future we want to see – just as the Trans Bears do in their
futuristic meme worlds that explore what could happen if we used memes
to escape our the current moment. Rather than wallow in our present
nihilistic memescape, the Trans Bears deploy memes as science fiction
tools for speculative worldbuilding, as a means to envision scenarios
set in alternative places and times based on pluralistic, positive
visions. The potential for memes to have this effect beyond their media
context was there all along, but the intensification of their
circulation around the world has increased the speed of and potential
for this process to occur.

As Grant Bollmer’s chapter looks back upon the history of memes as a
means to reconfigure or present understanding of them, we conclude this
chapter in the same manner. Originally uploaded to the website
Newgrounds and popularized by Something Awful and 4chan, the classic
meme ‘all your base are belong to us’ turned twenty this year. Smells
like early 2000s teen spirit. In the gloomy vacuum left by the dot-com
crisis, the new digital frontier lay wide open for the taking. Bases
were taken, new properties claimed. Libertinism is the cryptocurrency of
youthful hubris. Platform or surveillance capitalism wasn’t really a
thing yet (although a lot of the pawns were being positioned in
strategic anticipation while we were enjoying cute cat videos on Google
Videos).

In the mid-2010s, the ‘us’ in ‘all your base’ was identified as a highly
media-literate culture of young white men oblivious to their own
privileged position in the larger web of things.[^02introduction_9] But as popular
culture has been absorbed into a kind of memetic spectrum, this category
of ‘us’ is revealed to have always been inhabited by a heterogeneity of
agents. While we can see this see this in Jacob Sujin Kuppermann’s
history of ‘Gopod’ on the Whole Earth ‘Lectronic Link, and İdil Galip’s
reflection on the grotesque on Instagram, another excellent example is
in Caspar Chan’s account of Pepe the Frog’s resurrection in Hong Kong.
No longer the worn out crypto-facist figure the alt-right and
all-too-credulous news media worked together to create, Pepe has become
a symbol of solidarity for protesters as the city heaved with protests
over 2020. In Pepe, as well as in the signs, phrases, and—really—the
entire event of the 6th of January 2021’s storming of the US Capitol
Building, we can see that memes have gone beyond the internet, beyond
discourse, and beyond the image.

In February 2021, a digital rendition of the famous Nyan Cat GIF meme
was sold as a non-fungible token (NFT) by its creator Chris Torres for
almost 600,000 USD. NFTs are—in theory—a mechanism of ‘owning’ artworks
whose digital basis initially foreclosed their monetisation. While what
this amounts to is essentially a certificate that says ‘I own this’ the
blockchain technology that NFTs depend on nevertheless interrupts the
messy copypasta of anonymous and collective vernacular creativity, whose
progressive potential lied in having done away with any distinction
between original and copy, authentic or fake, private ownership and
communal stock, author and audience. Blockchain operationalizes a
cryptolibertarian logic of singularity and property against the logic of
promiscuous multiplicity offered by meme culture. Yet, ironically, it is
precisely the precarious ‘hacker class’ of online influencers that may
benefit from blockchain tech and social media fame to claim ownership
and profit from their immaterial labors—a dilemma Clusterduck’s essay in
this reader explores.

What will become of memes, then, hinges on developments too elaborate,
unstable, and entangled to fully anticipate. In their conceptual
idiosyncrasy and their phenomenal evanescence, memes reflect the
socio-technical milieu in which they insert themselves. And as they
become woven into our communicative repertoires, the meme in all
likelihood will lose claim to its status as a unique cultural or digital
object. There will be a time when this meme reader will make people
smile nostalgically, and there will be a time when it will all seem all
so ridiculous and stupid. But, while we do not want to heroize memes,
they do, *for us now*, represent a critical moment when the
instrumentarium of a global media spectacle is looped and becomes a
self-consuming excess, and the life it implicates in its fundamental
irresponsibility suddenly bursts out in laughter. The question remains
what kind of laughter memes potentialize, and who is laughing: is it the
liberating, carnivalesque kind, or the grotesque kind that defers to
viral media in nihilistic embrace? Is it the kind of emancipatory
laughter of political activists, or that of authoritarian leaders and
their troll armies as they leverage memetic tactics to maliciously nudge
their subjects or incite violence against minorities? The different
artistic, theoretical, and political contributions collected in this
volume render different answers to these questions, and we hope you
enjoy them.

## References

Bueno, Claudio Celis. “Harun Farocki's Asignifying Images.” *tripleC*
15, no. 2 (2017): 740-54.
<a href="https://triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/download/874/1040?inline=1">https://triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/download/874/1040?inline=1</a>.

Comaroff, [J.. “Alien-Nation: Zombies, Immigrants, and Millennial
Capitalism.” *South Atlantic
<a href="http://Quarterly*](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?hoXm6H)">Quarterly*](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?hoXm6H)</a> 101, no. 4
(October 1, 2002): 779–805. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-101-4-779">https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-101-4-779</a>.

Finkelstein, Robert. 2011. “Tutorial: Military Memetics.” Paper
presented at *Social Media for Defence* *Summit*, Alexandria, VA,
October 24, 2011.

Galison, Peter. “The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the
Cybernetic Vision.” *Critical Inquiry* 21, no. 1 (Autumn, 1994):
228-266.

Genosko, Gary. “Information and Asignification.” *Footprint* 8, no. 1
(Spring 2014): 13-28.

Huxtable, Simon. “Remembering a Problematic Past: TV Mystics,
*Perestroika* and the 1990s in Post-Soviet Media and Memory.” *European
Journal of Cultural Studies* 20, no. 3 (June 2017): 307–23.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1367549416682238">https://doi.org/10.1177/1367549416682238</a>.

Lazzarato, Maurizio. *Signs and Machines: Capitalism and the Production
of Subjectivity*. Translated by Joshua David Jordan. Los Angeles, CA:
Semiotext(e), 2014.

Phillips, Whitney and Ryan M. Milner. *You Are Here: A Field Guide for
Navigating Polarized Speech, Conspiracy Theories, and Our Polluted Media
Landscape.* Cambridge: MIT Press, 2020.

Žižek, Slavoj. *Organs without Bodies: Deleuze and Consequences.* New
York: Routledge, 2016.



[^02introduction_1]: Slavoj Žižek, *Organs without Bodies: Deleuze and Consequences*
    (New York: Routledge, 2016), 123.

[^02introduction_2]: Maurizio Lazzarato, [*Signs and Machines: Capitalism and the
    Production of Subjectivity*, trans. Joshua David Jordan,
    Semiotext(e) Foreign Agents Series (Los Angeles, CA: Semiotext(e),
    2014), <a href="http://39.](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?nObmdR)">39.](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?nObmdR)</a>

[^02introduction_3]: Claudio Celis Bueno, “Harun Farocki's Asignifying Images,”
    *tripleC* 15, no. 2 (2017): 742.
    <https://triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/download/874/1040?inline=1>.

[^02introduction_4]: Gary Genosko, “Information and Asignification,” *Footprint* 8, no.
    1 (Spring 2014): 13.

[^02introduction_5]: Bueno, “Harun Farocki's Asignifying Images,” 743.

[^02introduction_6]: J. Comaroff, “Alien-Nation: Zombies, Immigrants, and Millennial
    Capitalism,” *South Atlantic Quarterly* 101, no. 4 (October 1,
    2002): 779–805, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-101-4-779">https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-101-4-779</a>; Simon
    Huxtable, “Remembering a Problematic Past: TV Mystics, *Perestroika*
    and the 1990s in Post-Soviet Media and Memory,” *European Journal of
    Cultural Studies* 20, no. 3 (June 2017): 307–23,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1367549416682238">https://doi.org/10.1177/1367549416682238</a>.

[^02introduction_7]: Peter Galison, “The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the
    Cybernetic Vision,” *Critical Inquiry* 21, no. 1 (Autumn, 1994):
    228-266.

[^02introduction_8]: Robert Finkelstein, “Tutorial: Military Memetics” (Social Media
    for Defence Summit, Alexandria, VA, October 24, 2011).

[^02introduction_9]: Whitney Phillips and Ryan M. Milner, *You Are Here: A Field Guide
    for Navigating Polarized Speech, Conspiracy Theories, and Our
    Polluted Media Landscape* (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2020).
