---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Wojak’s lament: Excess and Voyeurism Under Platform Capitalism\
\
Anthony Glyn Burton

Those of us with faint memories of the early internet may remember it
making a different appeal: nobody needed to know who you were if you
didn’t want them to. This memory is made all the fainter with every
login to a platform and the uncanny accompaniment of feeling watched by
an unseen specter. But to call it being watched isn’t entirely accurate:
barring traumatic malfunction, human watching leaves an impression on a
negentropic memory, one retained over time through its relations and
contingencies and callable based on these unknowable strata. Platforms,
meanwhile, must account for these memories through bits, electricity,
and power bills: hence what begins as negentropy fuels the entropic
decay produced by the bunker hoards, hoards that make up the traces of
action we undertake in surveillance media. Thus, what appears to the
patrons of computational prosthesis as Turing’s hypothesis fulfilled—the
congruence of data storage and human memory—in reality leads to a
homogeneity that, paradoxically, extinguishes this very dream of capture
and reenactment. These bunkers contain the data and, in turn, the
empirical objects, network configurations, and algorithms that provide
the infrastructural basis of the contemporary web, and the fast-twitch
access to these bits in stasis is the backbone of platforms’
phantasmagoric liveliness. But the algorithmic workings on this well of
data present to each of us a highly customized experience with the
warmth of a dark cave: frozen images of the other comprise this
ostensibly personalized existence.

What political possibilities are foreclosed, and in turn, what
possibilities are opened up by the contrast between this datafied memory
and human memory? While platforms engineer a custom loneliness in order
to generate the activity upon which their economic models are based,
there exists a paradoxical means by which this valorization machine is
confounded: memes, particularly those that articulate common experience
through representation. By leaving an affective impression that exceeds
their circulation, memes like Wojak and NPCs open the possibility for
the articulation of belonging and political subjectivity that exceeds
the capture, extraction, and frozen identities of platform capitalism.

On one hand, these extractive processes are the primary engine by which
the circulation that makes up platformed experience functions, and their
infrastructures shape both the possibility of what can be said, how one
can reply, and what content is fit for circulation. On the other hand,
there is a trace left over by those memes that articulate something
beyond homophilic formatting and data capture. There is the impression
of there being someone else out there, someone who is like me but not
me. Instead of being reified into the commodity form through the
capture, extraction, and storage of information, the circulation of
memes articulates the presence of an other. This other goes beyond the
cardboard cutout version of the social world and leaves the affective
impression of belonging. By exceeding its capture, memery points to a
potential avenue for transcending the formatting and freezing of digital
life into mere bunker data.

## The Phantasmagoric Social: Excess, Memes, and Affective Identification\

In an aside of Chapter 2 in Platform Capitalism, Nick Srnicek contests
Tiziana Terranova’s view that user output is labor, claiming that since
‘most of our social interactions do not enter into a valorization
process… it is hard to make the case that what they do is labor,
properly speaking… \[instead\] advertising platforms appropriate data as
a raw material’.[^03chapter1_1] But this view of what constitutes valorization
assumes all that can enter into this process is only labor itself,
freely brought to market. While commodity capital self-valorizes through
the extraction built into alienated labor, Srnicek’s note opens the
question of what alienation, if not labor’s, constitutes this ‘raw
material’ from which the phantasmagoric social is constructed? True to
its ghostly presence, this raw material is mined from the iterative
production of affect. With the ‘anxiety of enjoyment’, Jodi Dean names
the compulsion to continually post that is engineered by platforms and
their construction of the phantasmagoric social. Activity on social
platforms provides a facsimile of sociality that, instead of leaving us
with the sense of accomplishment of furthering social bonds, postpones
this very drive in a masturbatory, junkish enjoyment.[^03chapter1_2] It is this
very deferral of affective closure—the neverending loop of alienated
utterance and activity—that constitutes the ‘raw material’ valorized by
platforms. In this sense, then, these platforms are machines that
circulate affect yet cancel the potential for activation. The
circulation of affect is the stream from which platforms extract surplus
value. Despite it not being an instance of exploitation in the classical
sense, there remains a valorization with a one-sided benefit. The
extraction of user data from platform activity gets something from us
that we ourselves have no use for, and relies on the continual
construction of something new to observe, something activating to react
to, and in turn new data to hoard in the bunker, to justify its own
subterranean existence. Called upon to reanimate the very process that
once gave it life, this data creates an closed loop that informs the
boundaries that mark out platforms and their social space: hence the
recommendation systems, sharing, nudges to circulate, and a resulting
homophily that signifies a welcome into an enclosed space.[^03chapter1_3]

This facsimile of social activity is the stuff of a platform’s memories.
Text is mined for things that, in the platform’s eye, signify meaning;
infrastructural syntaxes such as Like buttons and emoji reactions
provide a substitute for affective expression. As iterable objects,
then, memes in one sense engineer the very activity that creates
memories for capital’s data extraction machines. Yet in their
circulation as images, part of what they express exceeds these machines’
metrical tools. They are not the narrow expressive devices given from
above that format the potential for affective transfer, but instead
confound its measurement by exceeding the format that can be so
quantified. Machine learning libraries are (as of yet) underdeveloped in
identifying meaning in images. It is difficult for them to measure
anything in an image except the image’s similarity to those the machine
learning program has been trained upon: this confuses platform attempts
to capture user affect by measuring images. In their infinite
iterability and potential for remixing, memes retain the power to leave
impressions or traces much stronger than any infrastructural syntax can
hope to do by positing a necessary agential relationality between users
as both consumers and producers: in short, active humans involved in
their construction of their own social world.

In exploring this meme-cum-excess, I deal here with Wojak and his
friends, which we know otherwise as ‘NPCs’ or non-playable characters.
NPCs are figurative line-drawn characters usually engaged in some common
experience or experiencing some feeling. Wojak, the first character to
appear under this style, embodies this emotive expression though his
original slogan: ‘that feel when’. By providing a memetic face (and in
turn, a name) to affective states under network capitalism, the meme
genre has evolved to become the non-playable characters of a particular
social experience with particular sets of surface behaviour and
aesthetics.[^03chapter1_4] But it would be a mistake to dismiss NPCs as a Xeroxed
social or an exercise in stereotypes. Wojak and friends articulate an
experience that one may *know*, a flash of recognizability in their
representations of real archetypes or shared experiences. I may just as
easily locate myself in the commons when a doomer meme matches my
internal sentiments as I feel overly simplified or unfairly targeted by
a picture of the coomer beside a copy of Infinite Jest.[^03chapter1_5] This image
of the commons is the image of someone else out there, existing
alongside me. Memes circulate through networks, and there is an element
of affect that is produced in this traversal: impressions of the other
*who felt themselves in the NPC meme* are left and felt on me.[^03chapter1_6]

Figure 1: Wojak himself

Figure 2: Wojak wall

I’m using Wojak and NPC here interchangeably because while Wojak himself
might be the most recognizable type, he represents a genre of images
that share similarities both aesthetic (simple digital paint line
drawings) and functional (representing a ‘type’ of behaviors/appearances
that are found together) that comprise the NPC. Wojak’s name is a sort
of affective loanword, with the qualifier here a prime cut of digital
meaning mishmash: the word itself is Polish for ‘warrior’. It was the
username of a Polish user on the German chan board krautchan’s /int/
(international) board; the picture itself was posted by the user wojak,
and he claims that he found it on the Polish chan board vichan under the
original title ‘ciepła twarz.jpg’.[^03chapter1_7]

But there’s conflicting information. Part of the NPC genre, the ‘I wish
I was at home’ meme illustrating the inner monologue of a person at a
party, can be found first posted on the Wayback Machine from December
2009 on the website ’Sad and Useless.’ This is an image reposting
website that describes itself as the ‘The Most Depressive Site on the
Internet’, and likely not the original source of the image.[^03chapter1_8] Wojak,
likewise, makes it clear in his AmA that he found the picture at some
point before he posted it on Krautchan’s /int/. Yet short of the
original MS paint virtuoso who created the Wojak face emerging (let
alone being listened to!), it’s likely that these traces are the closest
that we’ll get to knowing the origin.[^03chapter1_9] From here, the concept of
wireframe MS paint figures that represent a particular affect,
monologue, or personality exploded into the many variations we know
today.

## NPCs and the Games They Play

It is in the iteration of NPC memes that there is potential for excess.
This excess is not, necessarily, politically palatable: as the digital
right[^03chapter1_10] has become increasingly outspoken, so too has it seemingly
held memery as a primary practice. Yet to dismiss NPC memes as solely
the domain of the digital right would be a mistake because it brackets a
fruitful opportunity to examine how they function in constructing
communities through the excess and refuse of platformed existence.

Take Chad. ‘Chad’ is the name given to an NPC-style character who
represents the archetype of a man who supposedly receives a
disproportionate share of women’s attention and sexuality. He is used to
represent the ultimate alpha male, the synthesis of the highest point on
each of the hierarchies that grow out of neoliberalism’s reconfiguration
of the social into the realm of the homo economicus[^03chapter1_11]. With Popeye
biceps, a Clark Kent jaw and a browline to block out the sun, he
represents an archetype of a person who is purportedly encountered
day-to-day, yet never exists within the communities to which he is
called to account. Chad is especially popular in digital incel
communities, whose chief ideology, the scientific black pill,
articulates a victimization complex and rank misogyny based on a rigidly
Manichean system of social value that locates themselves at the bottom.
The iterative and enclosed nature of the community (a nature of its own
making) prevents, by necessity, the existence of an *actual* Chad in its
midst, for the incel’s reflexive difference from Chad-types is how they
define their social existence. Yet Chad the *meme* appears both in
language and image as a sort of summoned Godhead among self-identified
incels. What is the function of this representation? By existing outside
the mass of players in the community, he becomes an imagined extension
of the incel’s own existence. Memetically, he rejects the bounding of a
particular system. Thus the construction and iteration of Chad is the
summoning of a spectre whose presence acts as a constant reminder of an
outside to the concatenated, homophilic image of the social world
presented by platform capitalism. On the one hand this mechanized body
compacts the mass whose culture he reflects into a ‘molar’ framework, a
mass of totalities, discrete and atomized aggregates that make up the
incel’s idea of his own experience.[^03chapter1_12] Yet this very molarity marks
out a metastability under which the individual acts of communities can
themselves flourish as unstable, changing, and possessing the potential
for generative activity as opposed to being frozen in time and place as
the imagified, extracted object. Chad posits an outside that remains
after the engineering of sameness and voyeuristic extraction has run its
course. And while network capitalism is explicitly marked by this
valorization circuit, this very circulation continually produces an
excess that remains outside of its momentary capture.

If there is such a thing as meme magic, it is this: the combination of
individual identification and collective iterability present in the
Wojak meme makes apparent the simulated nature of the platform’s social.
By being unstable in their ability to be remixed, reiterated, and
reposted, the not-quite-humans of NPC-style memes become part of a
metastability that represents those elements of the social world. This
reality, of course, being that which affect machines and their
engineering of homophily try so hard to avoid. The 𝕩 of white wojak
becomes the 𝕪 of Chad, before it turns into n𝕫 of Stacy, coomer, doomer,
doomer gf, that grid where all the female wojaks are matched to works in
feminist theory, et cetera. What is originally a normie in both presence
and aesthetic becomes the normie who is such because he is busy being
Chad in the normie world. The cast is outgrown as the borders of the
platform itself are ever more strongly articulated as enclosing, and at
every iteration ∈ the non-playable realm qua outside. Simondon calls
this process transduction, a process of mutual change that allows for
individuation to occur. Through the ever-evolving presence of those who
exist outside the platformed social, the very idea *of* a world outside
the confines of sameness takes shape as a metastability.[^03chapter1_13] This chain
of development is causal, through the remixing and reiteration of
particular expressions and affects contained within the memetic form.
And in the process of this unfolding, a split happens that allows for
memes to exceed the capture and circulation of capital flow. Since
extraction machines deal only in the formal elements of exchange, they
can only capture the act of sharing: while it relies on this exact
process of remixing to sustain the project of continued capture, it
cannot recognize the metastability that is articulated through the
unfolding chain. Thus, the metastability that allows for the NPC to
articulate shared experiences maintains itself through the refuse of
platform capital: that which is left over after circulation has been
captured and tracked.

## Wojak is You

Memes are the perfect object of capital—almost. Easily understandable
and affectively engaging, they contain within them the energy to compel
the user activity without which platform capitalism would have nothing
to hoard. But the memetic image persists in impression and remains
fertile ground for articulating the experience of being reduced to
sameness. What’s left over from the extraction process takes the form of
exactly what it cancels out: not the objective data in cold storage, but
a grammar in figurative form[^03chapter1_14] that articulates a collective
subjectivity. In their iterable nature and empty signification,
NPC-style memes posit the presence of an other that, by necessity
through its NPC nature, cannot exist actively in this affective
circulation. Wojak and NPC characters function to name a presence that
exists on the outside, and in this naming lies the potential for
individuation against homophilic machines. As Butler tells us, in naming
something we constitute someone while also locating ourselves.[^03chapter1_15] By
naming something, we signify it as relevant within our own processes of
individuation, something we have to contend with in our constitution of
our being. The valorization machine only registers circulation: it
cannot see the real social it purports to create. Thus in sharing Wojak
and friends, what appears on the surface as a set of cheap stereotypes
ends up unraveling our own reified existence, by providing a name to
those whose ‘typical’ behavior makes up a landscape as rich as the
social itself: a horizon that always, already exceeds the valorization
machine.

## References\

Brown, Wendy. *Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution.*
New York: Zone Books, 2015.

Butler, Judith. *Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative*. New
York: Routledge, 1997.

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. “Queering Homophily.” In *Pattern
Discrimination*, 59–98. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2018.

Dean, Jodi. “Affect and Drive”. In *Networked Affect*, edited by Ken
Hillis, Susanna Paasonen, and Michael Petit, 88–100. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015.

Einbinder, Nicole. “Pepe the Frog, an Alt-Right Symbol in the US, Has
Emerged as the Face of the Hong Kong Protests”. *Business Insider*,
Accessed 12 March 2021.
<a href="https://www.businessinsider.com/pepe-the-frog-alt-right-us-has-hong-kong-protests-2019-8">https://www.businessinsider.com/pepe-the-frog-alt-right-us-has-hong-kong-protests-2019-8</a>.

Gottfried, Paul. “The Decline and Rise of the Alternative Right”. *The
Unz Review*, 1 December 2008.
<a href="https://www.unz.com/pgottfried/the-decline-and-rise-of-the-alternative-right/">https://www.unz.com/pgottfried/the-decline-and-rise-of-the-alternative-right/</a>.

Mondon, Aurelien, and Aaron Winter. *Reactionary Democracy: How Racism
and the Populist Far Right Became Mainstream*. Brooklyn: Verso Books,
2020.

Munster, Anna. *An Aesthesia of Networks: Conjunctive Experience in Art
and Technology*. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2013.

Parikka, Jussi. “Animal Ensembles, Robotic Affects: Bees, Milieus, and
Individuation”. In *Insect Media: An Archaeology of Animals and
Technology*. University of Minnesota Press, 2011.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816667390.001.0001">https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816667390.001.0001</a>.

Robin, Corey. *The Reactionary Mind: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to
Sarah Palin*. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780199793747.001.0001">https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780199793747.001.0001</a>.

Sad and Useless. “About”. Accessed 12 March 2021.
<https://www.sadanduseless.com/about/>.

Srnicek, Nick. *Platform Capitalism*. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2017.

Simondon, Gilbert. *On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects.*
Translated by Cécile Malaspina and John Rogove. Minneapolis: Univocal,
2017.

Traverso, Enzo. *Left-Wing Melancholia: Marxism, History, and Memory*.
New York: Columbia University Press, 2016.

Tuters, Marc, and Sal Hagen. “(((They))) Rule: Memetic Antagonism and
Nebulous Othering on 4chan.” *New Media & Society* 22, no. 12 (2020):
2218–37. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444819888746">https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444819888746</a>.

Wallace-Wells, Benjamin. “Is the Alt-Right for Real?” *The New Yorker*.
Accessed 12 March 2021.
<a href="https://www.newyorker.com/news/benjamin-wallace-wells/is-">https://www.newyorker.com/news/benjamin-wallace-wells/is-</a>
the-alt-right-for-real.

Webster, James G. “The Duality of Media: A Structurational Theory of
Public Attention”. *Communication Theory* 21, no. 1 (2011): 43–66.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2010.01375.x">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2010.01375.x</a>.

SadandUseless. “What Do You See in This Picture?” Accessed 12 March
2021.
<a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20100328094531/https://www.sadanduseless.com/image.php?n=279">https://web.archive.org/web/20100328094531/https://www.sadanduseless.com/image.php?n=279</a>.

Wiggins, Bradley E, and G Bret Bowers. “Memes as Genre: A
Structurational Analysis of the Memescape”. *New Media & Society* 17,
no.11 (2015): 1886–1906. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814535194">https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814535194</a>.

[^03chapter1_1]: Nick Srnicek, *Platform Capitalism* (Cambridge: Polity Press,
    2017), 30.

[^03chapter1_2]: Jodi Dean, “Affect and Drive,” in *Networked Affect*, ed. Ken
    Hillis, Susanna Paasonen, and Michael Petit (Cambridge,
    Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015), 88-100

[^03chapter1_3]: Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, “Queering Homophily,” in *Pattern
    Discrimination*, (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018),
    60.

[^03chapter1_4]: Of course, there’s also the specific gray, plain-expressioned
    ‘NPC’ meme of this same genre. I’m intentionally using NPC to
    describe the genre and not just the plain gray face because the idea
    behind the NPC—that these line drawings represent types of people
    one encounters offline, with no ‘inner monologue’, as one poster
    puts it—is crucial to how these images take form as empty
    signifiers, and to call them ‘Wojak’ derivatives is to undermine the
    ways they have iterated much beyond the original Wojak drawing.

[^03chapter1_5]: Brave of me to admit, isn’t it?

[^03chapter1_6]: Munster, *An Aesthesia of Networks: Conjunctive Experience in Art
    and Te*chnology (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2013), 12.

[^03chapter1_7]: I’m drawing this information from a Reddit Ask Me Anything thread
    made by the poster. It can be read at
    <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20190414195031/https://www.reddit.com/r/datfeel/comments/p8v3d/iama%5C_wojakvoyack%D0%B2%D0%BE%D1%8F%D0%BA%5C_guy%5C_who%5C_felt%5C_first%5C_feel%5C_amaa/">https://web.archive.org/web/20190414195031/https://www.reddit.com/r/datfeel/comments/p8v3d/iama\_wojakvoyack%D0%B2%D0%BE%D1%8F%D0%BA\_guy\_who\_felt\_first\_feel\_amaa/</a>.

[^03chapter1_8]: A little fuel to the fire of what, exactly, constituted the
    pre-platform capital internet is this idea that there was a time
    when everything was not stored or captured in a bunker.

[^03chapter1_9]: And amateur internet researchers will always be more apt at
    tracing these histories than any academic, because being online is
    being one and the same with your own archive. For a completist
    history of what is known about Wojak et. al., I direct the user to
    <a href="https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/wojak">https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/wojak</a>,
    <a href="https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/wojak/children">https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/wojak/children</a>,
    <a href="https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/i-wish-i-was-at-home-they-dont-know">https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/i-wish-i-was-at-home-they-dont-know</a>,
    <a href="https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/i-wish-i-was-at-home-they-dont-know">https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/i-wish-i-was-at-home-they-dont-know</a>,
    <https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/npc-wojak>. There is also
    information on the Wayback’s copy of Encyclopaedia Dramatica.

[^03chapter1_10]: It's in vogue to refer to this group as the ‘alt-right’, but
    neo-fascism, reactionary impulses, rigid individualism and a victim
    complex have been the sentiments of right-wing culture long before
    they found refuge online (see Mondon and Winter 2020, Robin 2012,
    Traverso 2016, or five random links in the ‘history’ section on the
    Tea Party wikipedia page). The term itself originated in a speech at
    the H.L Mencken club in a 2008 speech by Paul Gottfried, author of
    riveting books like *The Conservative Movement*, *Multiculturalism
    and the Politics of Guilt*, *The Strange Death of Marxism*, and
    *After Liberalism* (published 2001). And considering the term
    ‘alt-right’ was popularized by Richard Spencer, one of its
    self-anointed leaders (Wallace-Wells 2015; this was before he became
    famous for getting punched on camera), using it with regularity is
    playing into an ahistorical con.

[^03chapter1_11]: Wendy Brown, *Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth
    Revolution* (New York: Zone Books 2015), 39.

[^03chapter1_12]: Brown, *Undoing the Demos,* 280.

[^03chapter1_13]: Gilbert Simondon, *On the Mode of Existence of Technical
    Objects,* trans. Cécile Malaspina and John Rogove (Minneapolis:
    Univocal, 2017), 140; see also Jussi Parikka, *Insect Media: An
    Archaeology of Animals and Technology* (University of Minnesota
    Press, 2011).

[^03chapter1_14]: Marc Tuters, and Sal Hagen. “(((They))) Rule: Memetic Antagonism
    and Nebulous Othering on 4chan,” *New Media & Society* 22, no. 12
    (2020): 2226.

[^03chapter1_15]: Judith Butler, *Excitable Speech: A Politics of the
    Performative*, (New York: Routledge, 1997).
