---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Memes in Kuwait as Coping Mechanism for a Lack of Infrastructure\
\
Yasmeen Khaja

When the pandemic arrived in Kuwait, things happened fast. Makeshift
COVID-19 testing centers were quickly organized, tracking technologies
for contact tracing were put into use, grassroots organizations worked
to provide suddenly-inaccessible everyday needs to residents, and long
lockdowns were implemented. Kuwaiti TV channels and public media buzzed
with enthusiasm for the state’s initial response to COVID-19.

Then, about a year into the pandemic—7 February 2021—gyms and salons
were forced to close once again. Cases had gone up dramatically, nearly
doubling in number. Restaurant-goers. however, could still dine in with
unregulated conditions save for an 8 p.m. curfew for all commercial
activities. After 8, you couldn’t eat at a restaurant, but you could do
virtually everything else. Unsurprisingly, these decisions were met with
an increasing spread of the coronavirus. On March 4th, the country
witnessed its highest number of new cases with 1,700 reported in a
single day. That same night, the Cabinet met to impose a nationwide
curfew and reshuffled some rules: salons and gyms that had been forced
to close a month earlier could reopen, while dining in at restaurants
was replaced by a delivery and pick up only rule. Parks and other
outdoor public spaces were set to close, and a 5pm to 5am curfew would
be implemented.

These new restrictions were set to begin on the night of March 7th, but
much was unclear: were restaurants allowed to deliver after hours? What
happens to those unable to obtain permits? Why are outdoor parks—places
where it’s easiest to practice social distancing—shutting down? The day
before these restrictions took place, the Ministry announced that parks
will actually remain open for exercise, but not picnics. On the first
day of the curfew, traffic jams lasted for hours as workers rushed home.
Videos of people leaving their cars to walk and city workers stranded
without transportation circulated online, mainly on Twitter. On March
8th, the Cabinet met again, and the private media organization Kuwait
News reported that both extending the curfew and allowing restaurants to
deliver while it was active were on the meeting agenda. The head of the
Restaurants Union, Fahad al-Arbash, was also quoted anticipating good
news, but after the meeting neither issue was resolved.

One of the most keenly felt critiques of the political system and
government of Kuwait that came out of this pandemic was delivered in the
form of a meme: an animated WhatsApp sticker of a 100 fils coin flipping
between sides labelled *lockdown* and *no lockdown.* The message this
sticker carries is simple: state decisions feel like nothing but a coin
toss. But the medium— the sticker itself—is uncanny. For those who
remain protected by fluctuating policies, law is mediated with no real
consequences. In effect, so is their dealing with it. The sticker comes
from the same place that yields uneasiness—the screen—except it lets us
reconcile it.

![Curfew, no curfew. Digital animated sticker. Received on WhatsApp.
February 21, 2021. Fig. 1 Curfew, no
curfew.](media/image1.jpeg){width="2.0833333333333335in"
height="4.5488156167979in"}

Fig. 1 Curfew, no curfew. Digital animated sticker. Received on
WhatsApp. February 21, 2021.

A lack of planning and foresight—it seemed—left the government with an
ad hoc strategy that appeared to rely on trial and error. Whether this
was really true was beside the point; it probably (hopefully) isn’t. The
point is the virtual experience of it all: the doomscrolling, the
fragmented information, the discombobulating pulls of social and
traditional media, the lack of a cohesive narrative. There’s already
little motivation to participate in any politics that aren’t directly
changing one’s life, especially not at the expense of one’s own
security. But during the pandemic, politics became even more virtual,
with the state becoming a live theater in which the unaffected audience
witnesses major actors improvising. If laughter is indeed the best
medicine, there’s nothing quite as satisfying as a punchline that you
can download. Memes become a coping mechanism for infrastructural
failure—a balm especially soothing for when it seems like there’s
nothing else you can do.

## Memes from the Pandemic

The rise of internet memes in Kuwait is concurrent with the adoption of
social media for communication in the country. Though humor can be
traced to Kuwait’s cultural production since the 40s, the speed of
conversation on Twitter and Whatsapp has amplified a cultural tendency
to simply make fun of things. There is a kind of meme in Kuwait that
isn’t a prescriptive template requiring a certain level of internet
fluency, but a free-for-all mocking made up of cartoonish images with
text about an event is happening, or event-specific images with
satirical text. They’re easy to make on any social media app—just upload
an image and add some text to it. These memes work like primal language,
or like a joke: communication that doesn’t change anything, or *do*
anything, except carry its message to the receiver.

With the onset of the pandemic in late February 2020, when the first few
cases were traced to people having just returned from Iran, a few
quarantine facilities were set up for people at hospitals, camps,
and—for the definitively non-severe cases—the Khiran Resorts. This was a
large beachfront resort with villas, chalets, and apartment studios: a
tried and tested spot for local family vacations. It was around this
time that pandemic memes began to be forwarded, attached, uploaded, and
made into stickers. Some didn’t need much cultural context, like a stock
image of five white doctors with a caption reading, ‘وضع قروبات
الواتساب’ (‘What Whatsapp groups are like now’). Other memes required a
knowledge of what was happening on the ground, like figure 2’s collage
of the Khiran Resort and Nabeel Shuail—one of the first Kuwaiti singers
and a symbolic figure dearly nicknamed the hummingbird of the Gulf—with
a photoshopped mask asking ‘ملكي ولا استيديو؟’ (‘King suite or
studio?’).

![Fig. 2 King suite or
studio?](media/image2.jpeg){width="2.7777777777777777in"
height="2.7777777777777777in"}

Fig. 2 King suite or studio? Digital image. Received on WhatsApp.
February 25, 2020.

Another meme from this period: a video of a woman declaring the free
food provided at the resort to be bland, inedible, oily, and the salad
without sauce. The actual video is a 57–second long unrevelatory
Snapchat, where the person behind the camera complains about the
containers of untouched food and says that she wishes she hadn’t come
back to Kuwait. But the comment that the salad doesn’t even have *sauce*
prompted a flurry of online responses united by the hashtag and nickname
for the woman \#أمالصوص (‘umm al-sauce,’ or the one with sauce) as well
as an article in *Watan*—an Arab-American newsletter—describing the
video as ‘an irritating clip that shook Kuwait’[^08chapter6_1] and eventually
turned into a Whatsapp sticker (fig. 3). Even *Al-Majlis*—an online
newspaper run by Kuwait’s Ministry of Information—tweeted a video of Dr.
Mona Abdulredha (a well-known doctor and daughter of the late iconic
Kuwaiti actor Abdulhussain Abdulredha) wherein she directly addresses
‘umm al-sauce,’ asking her to show just how she’d manage to survive the
pandemic outside of Kuwait. Dr. Mona goes on to reiterate what hundreds
of comments already expressed: Kuwait is a ‘mothering, giving country’,
and that its citizens ought to see it that way. Beyond the nationalist
rhetoric, Dr. Mona isn’t wrong: if your quarantine facility is a resort,
*something* must be working in your favor.

![The salad doesn't have dressing. Digital sticker. Received on
WhatsApp. March 5, 2021. Fig 3. The salad doesn't have
dresing.](media/image3.jpeg){width="2.7777777777777777in"
height="2.7777777777777777in"}

Fig 3. The salad doesn't have dressing. Digital sticker. Received on
WhatsApp. March 5, 2021.

A lot happens around a joke like this, and the activity alone means
there is attention and thereby potential for something to be done, or
for something to be learned. Of course, a video of a person in a resort
complaining about a dry salad is pathetic and ripe with memetic
possibility. But at the beginning of the video, the woman addresses the
Minister of Finance—she calls out to him, to see the waste in what is
happening. Her point, I believe, is not to have a well-dressed salad,
but to draw attention to the fact that there is a ton of money being
spent and things still do not work.[^08chapter6_2] The problem is that this meaning
is lost when the video becomes a meme. It is easy to laugh at the
forwarded video, the sticker, the joke of someone complaining about a
dry salad in the middle of a pandemic—I still do—but nothing is learned
regarding the structures or policies that led to these events. What we
get instead is a salve to use when the next symptom of systemic failure
comes around. This is the nature of the meme in online discourse: it
perpetuates hell, then helps you survive it.

## The Absence of Feeling

In *Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic*[^08chapter6_3] Henri Bergson
writes that ‘*the absence of feeling* which usually accompanies
laughter,’ is crucial to the ability to laugh at everything. He reckons
that if you were to ‘look upon life as a disinterested spectator: many a
drama will turn into a comedy.’[^08chapter6_4] If apathy is the mechanism of humor
that lets us laugh at hard things, then the kinds of memes that can be
found in the Kuwaiti digital public—trivializing issues by turning them
into caricatures of themselves—signals a kind of apathy towards how
things are handled, namely with regard to the ability of the citizen to
change it.

A meme isn’t a site to critically examine a problem. For Kuwaiti memes,
this means that the humor is only apparent to those who share the same
apathy towards things—they’re ideologically comfortable and don’t
require much interpretative work. Perhaps the only critical moment that
a meme can offer is when it fails to deliver a punchline. Take a bad
joke, for example: if a joke is not funny, it has failed as a joke, and
what’s left are the words that should’ve done something. At that moment,
the lack of humor suddenly reveals something that maybe, had the joke
landed, would’ve been invisible. Humor conceals the fact that nothing
has actually changed.

The more Kuwaiti memes are shared, looked at, and laughed at, the more
questions of governance and its failures are obscured. The sticker of
the coin flipping replaces an understanding of why decisions have been
revised so often in the pandemic. Nabeel Shuail memed into a kind of
sweetheart asking if you have a king suite or studio at the resorts has
a coddling effect. When it doesn’t, a given meme simply falls flat. When
memes are circulating, moving across social platforms and among groups
of people, they don’t make space for changing the way we think about
whatever disaster the memes are addressing—they simply reproduce the
disaster in mimetic form, and then deliver the memes that help cope with
it. So, if a meme is not capable of transforming the way we think about
something, what does a meme do when it moves among some groups of people
but not others?

## Those Who Laugh Together, Stay Together

Humor is a deeply cultural language that relies on factors like social
context for a joke to work. This makes laughter a strong binding
agent—when groups of people can laugh at the same thing together, they
obviously find the same thing to be funny. However, their laughter alone
is a signal that they share something far more important: the *ability*
to find something funny. To Bergson’s point, if apathy is required to
render something laughable, then that means that those who laugh at the
same thing share their position of disinterested spectatorship. They are
witnessing, but unbothered.

This sense of togetherness becomes even more apparent in internet
meme-exchange. On an average day online, we might pass by thousands of
images and strings of text. The algorithmic reasons we may be seeing
certain items of content and not others is hidden by the user interface.
What we see are decontextualized articles, opinions, memes, essays,
forwards, videos, links, and status updates—as if there is nothing else
to be learned about where they had come from. Did someone send this to
me directly, or am I seeing it on my feed? Who published this? What are
the motives this thing’s being shared? On the internet, and especially
on mobile — where scrolling is the main form of movement—there is little
to no room to understand the background of what we’re seeing. What we
see is what we get.

When it comes to humorous things like gifs, stickers, and memes we
experience them in an even quicker flash. They are funny, or they are or
not. For those who get the joke, something like a bond is created.
Sharing the sticker of umm al-sauce creates a space to laugh again,
*together*, at something that is now far removed from the actual event
or its real-life implications.

In *How to Do Things With Memes,* Eric Thurm converses with
Wittgenstein’s language-games. ‘The closer words are shared and the
deeper they are held, the harder it becomes for their users to back away
from the things they are doing when they speak.’[^08chapter6_5] Sharing memes
starts to crystallize a myopic view of reality. With the collapse of
meaning, memes meme for meme purposes only: the meme is the end.

As coronavirus cases first started to escalate in Kuwait towards the end
of February 2020, memes were not harbingers of racism, but rather
trafficked in jokes that could have only been formed from a racist
worldview. There is a fine distinction between the two. A photo of the
Turkish celebrity chef and meme figure ‘Salt Bae’ was sent around with
the chef labeled ‘Iran’, the salt as ‘corona virus’, and the out of
frame salted object as ‘Kuwait’. Another sticker used an image of former
Parliament Member Waleed al-Tabatabaie—known for his conservative
Islamist politics—saying ‘هالمرة صج كله من إيران’ (‘This time it really
is Iran’s fault’). Reading this sticker as a joke reveals many things,
mainly that for those with racist worldviews, Iran is an easy culprit.
The jokes aren’t funny, but to address them as unfunny would be to
address a message that is far from the message that this meme carries.
When it comes to memes, the joke is the point.

![Saltbae meme with Iran, Coronavirus, and Kuwait. Digital image.
Received on WhatsApp. Feb 27, 2020. Fig. 4 Iran, Kuwait,
Coronavirus](media/image4.jpeg){width="2.7777777777777777in"
height="3.5159995625546805in"}

Fig. 4 Saltbae meme with Iran, Coronavirus, and Kuwait. Digital image.
Received on WhatsApp. Feb 27, 2020

![This time it really is Iran's fault. Digital sticker. Received on
WhatsApp. March 5, 2021. Fig. 5 This time it really is Iran's
fault.](media/image5.tif){width="2.7777777777777777in"
height="2.7777777777777777in"}

Fig. 5 This time it really is Iran's fault. Digital sticker. Received on
WhatsApp. March 5, 2021

There have been multiple critiques of the failure of the Kuwaiti
government to address the root of problems. Policies have long protected
Kuwaiti citizens in ways that render the environment and 70% of the
entire country’s population, made up of migrant workers, , vulnerable.
But from Sharifa AlShalfan’s examination of the effects of COVID-19 on
existing urban infrastructure, it appears decisions in the pandemic were
especially designed to leave non-Kuwaiti residents facing
consequences.[^08chapter6_6] As Kuwaiti officials encourage xenophobic hatred by
announcing plans mid-pandemic to reduce the expat population down to
30%, the practice of neglecting real issues for ones materialized out of
insecurity is perpetuated. Problems only worsen as the byproducts of a
faulty system reveal its shortcomings under massive pressure to perform,
and to perform quickly—the pandemic being the catalyst. These social
critiques are quick to draw on law, policy, and regulation that affect
the course of society, but seldom do they address the theatrics of the
Kuwaiti government. On the internet, there is no government. What we are
given instead is a charade that acts and talks like a state.

## The Final Meme

Bergson exemplifies the comic as a disinterested spectator. But it helps
to think more specifically about the unaffected spectator, for whom the
stakes of an event are low. To bear witness to a disaster is not unlike
watching it unfold onstage: the event is acutely real, yet out of reach.
Consequently, the audience is quite literally out of touch. As Mordechai
Gordon writes, ‘humor allows us to view the world from a perspective
that is amusing and comical rather than serious or sad.’[^08chapter6_7] It is all
too easy to become disillusioned online, where meaning is compounded and
then collapsed into something alienating—hence the persistence of the
joke.

Of course, the memes I have discussed here are—for a lack of a better
word—mainstream. They are populist even by the standards of the
internet, in that they transcend the need for prior literacy in meme
culture. This is what makes them powerful tools to speak with. But as
regards their potential to become a site for useful critique, these
memes fall short. They are circulated to diffuse tension and offer a
cheap laugh. All of this continues to mystify the conditions that
sustain xenophobia, climate deterioration,[^08chapter6_8] and an unimaginable labor
crisis in Kuwait.[^08chapter6_9]

## References

Alshalfan, Sharifa, “COVID-19 in Kuwait: How Poor Urban Planning and
Divisive Policies Helped the Virus Spread.” *LSE Blog*, 16 September
2020.

Bergson, Henri. *Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic.*
Translated by Claudesly Brereton, and Fred Rothwell. Mineola: Dover
Publications, Inc., 2005.

Gordon, Mordechai. *Humor*, *Laughter and Human Flourishing: A
Philosophical Exploration of the Laughing Animal.* Springer, 2014.

Hamadah, Faisal. “COVID and Kafala.” *Monthly Review Online*, August 17,
2020. <https://mronline.org/2020/08/17/covid-and-kafala/>.

Thurm, Eric. “How to Do Things With Memes.” *Real Life Magazine*,
January 16, 2018.
[*https://reallifemag.com/how-to-do-things-with-memes/*](https://reallifemag.com/how-to-do-things-with-memes/).

Watan. “فيديو-مستفز-لمواطنة-كويتية-من-داخل-الح.” March 26, 2020.
<a href="https://www.watanserb.com/2020/03/26/%D9%81%D9%8A%D8%AF%D9%8A%D9%88-%D9%85%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%81%D8%B2-%D9%84%D9%85%D9%88%D8%A7%D8%B7%D9%86%D8%A9-%D9%83%D9%88%D9%8A%D8%AA%D9%8A%D8%A9-%D9%85%D9%86-%D8%AF%D8%A7%D8%AE%D9%84-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD/">https://www.watanserb.com/2020/03/26/%D9%81%D9%8A%D8%AF%D9%8A%D9%88-%D9%85%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%81%D8%B2-%D9%84%D9%85%D9%88%D8%A7%D8%B7%D9%86%D8%A9-%D9%83%D9%88%D9%8A%D8%AA%D9%8A%D8%A9-%D9%85%D9%86-%D8%AF%D8%A7%D8%AE%D9%84-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD/</a>

[^08chapter6_1]: “فيديو-مستفز-لمواطنة-كويتية-من-داخل-الح,” *Watan,* March 26, 2020,
    <a href="https://www.watanserb.com/2020/03/26/%D9%81%D9%8A%D8%AF%D9%8A%D9%88-%D9%85%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%81%D8%B2-%D9%84%D9%85%D9%88%D8%A7%D8%B7%D9%86%D8%A9-%D9%83%D9%88%D9%8A%D8%AA%D9%8A%D8%A9-%D9%85%D9%86-%D8%AF%D8%A7%D8%AE%D9%84-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD/">https://www.watanserb.com/2020/03/26/%D9%81%D9%8A%D8%AF%D9%8A%D9%88-%D9%85%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%81%D8%B2-%D9%84%D9%85%D9%88%D8%A7%D8%B7%D9%86%D8%A9-%D9%83%D9%88%D9%8A%D8%AA%D9%8A%D8%A9-%D9%85%D9%86-%D8%AF%D8%A7%D8%AE%D9%84-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD/</a>

[^08chapter6_2]: Later in 2020, most of major public discourse in Kuwait addressed
    massive corruption and cases of money laundering.

[^08chapter6_3]: Henri Bergson, *Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic.*
    trans. Claudesly Brereton, and Fred Rothwell (Mineola, New York:
    Dover Publications, Inc., 2005), 10.

[^08chapter6_4]: Bergson, *Laughter,* 10.

[^08chapter6_5]: Eric Thurm, “How to Do Things With Memes,” *Real Life Magazine*,
    January 16, 2018,
    [*https://reallifemag.com/how-to-do-things-with-memes/*](https://reallifemag.com/how-to-do-things-with-memes/).

[^08chapter6_6]: Sharifa Alshalfan, “COVID-19 in Kuwait: How Poor Urban Planning
    and Divisive Policies Helped the Virus Spread,” *LSE Blog*,
    September 16, 2020,

    <a href="https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/covid19/2020/09/16/covid-19-in-kuwait-how-poor-urban-planning-and-divisive-policies-helped-the-virus-spread/">https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/covid19/2020/09/16/covid-19-in-kuwait-how-poor-urban-planning-and-divisive-policies-helped-the-virus-spread/</a>

[^08chapter6_7]: Mordechai Gordon, *Humor*, *Laughter and Human Flourishing: A
    Philosophical Exploration of the Laughing Animal* (Springer, 2014),
    3.

[^08chapter6_8]: In 2018, flash floods in Kuwait revealed extreme unpreparedness.
    Memes permeated social media, and I traced their use in perpetuating
    national identity online.
    [*https://vimeo.com/341394524*](https://vimeo.com/341394524).

[^08chapter6_9]: Faisal Hamadah writes about the Kafala system and migrant labor a
    few months into the coronavirus pandemic. See Faisal Hamadah, “COVID
    and Kafala,” *Monthly Review Online*, 17 August 2020,
    [*https://mronline.org/2020/08/17/covid-and-kafala/*](https://mronline.org/2020/08/17/covid-and-kafala/).
