---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# **Masks, Monsters, and Memes: In Conversation with Scoobert Doobert**

###By Max Horwich

Forgive the ‘Webster’s Dictionary defines…’ introduction, but I recently
learned (from Wikipedia, obviously) that the word meme comes from the
Greek word for ‘imitation/impersonation.’ When I excitedly relayed my
discovery to Scoobert Doobert, he already knows: ‘I actually studied
Ancient Greek for a minute,’ he tells me. ‘When I retire, I want to
translate the early Socratic dialogues into Japanese. Everyone has to
have goals.’

Over the past six months, I’ve spoken to Scoobert Doobert more often
than my own parents, although I still don’t know his real name and have
never seen his face. He’s a San Diego-based musician, and I’ve been
working with him on a variety of techy creative projects—building his
website, animating his album covers to make Spotify canvases, designing
an AR Instagram filter for the release of his upcoming EP, that sort of
thing.

Late last summer, a friend sent me a link to his album-length music
video *Masks and Monsters*, a sprawling reflection on life in the early
months of quarantine set to a pastiche of woozy, psychedelic guitar pop.
I watched the 50-minute video in its entirety four times that night. We
were introduced over the phone two days later and have been working
together ever since.

![Fig. 1: Still from Scoobert Doobert’s video for ‘A Good Life’](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/7.1.jpeg)

<br/>

While his stage name and many of his song titles (‘Shaggy’s Anthem,’
‘Mystery Machine,’ ‘What a Velma What a Night,’ etc.) might give the
impression of some sort of Scooby Doo-themed novelty act, he rather uses
this source material as a conceptual and ideological framework through
which he examines and navigates the contemporary world. It turns out to
be a disarmingly potent metaphor: accidental heroes with no superpowers
or special abilities—they’re not even brave, they’re just stoned—forced
to confront one monster after another which, in the end, always turn out
to be just another rich asshole.

However, Scoob is quick to clarify: ‘My namesake is actually the
Scoobert Doobert memes. So let the record show, it wasn’t from Scooby
Doo. In fact, there is no character named Scoobert Doobert. Just
Scoobert Doo.’

![Fig. 2: A tryptic of stills from the music video for ‘Bread Stapled to Trees’](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/7.2.jpeg)

<br/>

Much of his work engages heavily with memes—from his ongoing series of
one-minute songs dedicated to various Subreddits, to the year-in-review
supercut for his recent single ‘2020 Is Over,’ to the aforementioned
*Masks and Monsters*, which feels like a 50-minute scroll through
<a href="http://knowyourmeme.com">knowyourmeme.com</a> set to music. And while his work is at times
laugh-out-loud funny (the shot of Christ on the cross at the end of his
video for ‘Bread Stapled to Trees’ is one of the best visual puns I’ve
ever seen), the humor is often a Trojan Horse for genuinely affecting
moments of open-hearted poignancy and philosophical inquiry.

In many ways, Scoobert Doobert is himself a living meme, a meta-modern
spin on Gilbert and George’s ‘living sculpture’ personas of the previous
century. Unfettered by the shackles of his Christian name and real-world
identity, he is free to ascend to a higher plane of existence, becoming
one with the internet and the zeitgeist that it has spawned.

Scoobert explains it more humbly: ‘For me, being liberated of identity
allows me to create things that I might normally be embarrassed by.
David Bowie said in an interview that his goal of art is akin to being
in a pool, deep enough to barely touch the bottom. That resonates with
me, but I don’t know if I can do that without some freedom of judgement.
Then again, David Bowie wasn’t his real name.’

I recently called Scoob to talk about memes, what they mean to him, and
what they mean to all of us.

———

*I had your song ‘Don’t Worry’ stuck in my head recently and realized
the hook is a paraphrase of a joke I’ve seen on Twitter. It got me
thinking about how music engages with meme culture, and how much it’s
changed over, say, the past decade. Ten years out from the coinage of
the term trollgaze and we’ve had Beyonce and Lizzo unassumingly
interpolating tweets into lyrics for chart-topping songs. It feels like
pop music is figuring out what to do with memes.*

Popular music has always been meme-based. A ‘hit’ is unpredictable, it
catches some invisible thread of shared reality.

Now it's like an internet allegory, where you're using this cultural
repository like in the way that we used to use Shakespeare or the
Odyssey. Then it's taking that same thing, but then being recursive with
it—it's a really cool thing about where we're essentially headed.
Allegory used to be such a highbrow art, and now it's becoming as
lowbrow as a bastardization of a bastardization of a tweet. It's taking
something that used to be part of an institution, tearing it down, and
then rebuilding it back up while laughing at it.

People talk about how Donald Trump was this very postmodern president,
like revealing how every institution is fake and flawed; but then
there's kind of a necessary question of ‘and then what? What do you do
after that?’ And there’s no real postmodern answer.

I think that when it wraps back around on itself and you get to the
absurdity of meta-modernism, then you’re able to look at things more
honestly. I think there's a lot of power there because you may actually
get an answer out of it, not like an answer that's handed down to you
from God, but an answer that we recognize as entirely flawed and
entirely artificial, but still useful.

And I think that it's the role of the artist to try and influence that
conversation, to try and nudge us along... to look at the world that
we've created, look at the amazing scientific advancements, but also
look at the things that we completely don't understand—probably never
will understand, and have the hubris to think that we will—and digest
it, help people digest it. Be part of the conversation that is the
dialectic of culture.

I really believe that through absurdism, by taking things that are
precious and making them unprecious, but then analyzing them and seeing
what we still want even if it’s artificial—what we still think has value
in an entirely artificial world—there's a very optimistic path that we
could take, that recognizes that everything is meaningless, but then
does the next thing beyond just tearing it down.

*Absolutely. When I think about the absurdity of this time period, and
the way art reflects that and tries to deal with it—which is something
that I see you engaging with a lot in your work—it reminds me of how
modernism largely emerged as a response to World War I, and this
previously unimaginable sense of, like, ‘Oh, shit, people can be
awful.’*

We have the means to be awful on a grander scale. We were always awful.
We just... industrialization turned to war, and then from there we
realized that we were able to create hell on earth, and we did. We chose
that option.

*Right. And since then there’s been this cultural churn over the past
century, where movements will emerge to combat or subvert the dominant
problem of the day, and the Powers That Be figure out ways to adopt the
tools of our resistance and judo flip us back into subservience. Like,
the things that saved us from misery a hundred years ago ended up making
us bored, and the things that saved us from boredom fifty years ago
ended up making us anxious. And now we’re so entrenched and overwhelmed
by that anxiety that, like, it seems easier to imagine the end of the
world than the end of capitalism. It’s hard to address a problem when
you’re so deep in it that you don’t even have the language to identify
and describe it, and it seems to me like one of the roles of memes as an
artform (or whatever you want to call them) has been to help us develop
the language.*

I think that's barking up the wrong tree though. I think that
postmodernism, to me at least, was all about trying to find the right
language to deconstruct language. And, like... it's so hard to read
Derrida. It's just a nightmare. He's a genius, and you can get great
stuff out of it. But it almost feels like talking to a lawyer about law
rather than talking about, like, ‘why do we even need a law?’

The longer that we're kept out of the roots of the problem, the harder
it will be to really talk about or tackle the problem. And sometimes I
feel like we spend so much time trying to develop the proper language to
discuss something that we end up getting thrown off course through that
same verbal judo.

Like, I really like Socrates, a lot more than Plato. I like him because
he's this ultimate ironic figure. You don't really know his true
identity. You don't know what he looks like. You don't know any of his
own words. You just know that he could go into town and talk to the
smartest guy and make them feel like an idiot; because we're all idiots,
and his central wisdom is we're all idiots. And, it's like, that's a
really hard thing for people that are academic and people that have
aspirations to cope with. That's why I like absurdism so much — I think
it drills back down to the essential truth that, like, we're not that
smart. We're not that good. There's not a lot for us to grasp onto. We
can't trust our eyes. We can't trust our experiences. We can't trust the
systems that we’ve built. All of it is artificial.

![Figure 3: Still from ‘Scoobert Doobert Eats a Banana in the Void’](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/7.3.jpeg)

<br/>

And then what do you do with that knowledge, according to Socrates? You
laugh! And you just say, like, ‘I don't really know what good *is*, but
that doesn't mean I shouldn't try to be good.’ And it's like, there are
these contradictions that you can't get to with language. Like you can't
dissect and find an answer with language, but it doesn't necessarily
mean like you have to say, ’Oh, there's a Platonic Ideal.’ That's a
stupid leap, in my opinion, from ‘we can't understand anything, we're
all idiots, deal with it, accept it’ to ‘no, no, no, there's this
*thing*, we just can't get to it. It's like looking at the sun... but it
exists.’

And so in terms of memes and stuff, I think that it's getting hijacked
by the thing that it makes fun of. And that pisses me off a bit. When
you're waving a meme flag while you're storming the Capitol, it's awful,
but it's also so absurd; and if you can’t see the absurdity in it, then
I don't think you can be broken from the chains that it's ensnaring you
in.

For me, hope lies in acceptance and then moving forward. Because if you
accept that we're all in this fatalist experience with artificial
trappings that make us *feel* comfortable and safe, but that safety and
comfort don't really exist, you feel anxious. But you could also feel
community, because, like, we're all in the same boat and nobody's better
than each other. Nobody has any secret wisdom, and that's freeing to me.
That's the state of play that I think Derrida was getting at, but had a
hard time communicating because he was trying to deconstruct language
with language, rather than just laughing.

*Since we’re having an academic discussion about memes, I feel like we
should probably talk about Richard Dawkins. I haven’t actually read The
Selfish Gene —I was supposed to read it in grad school but I think I was
busy that week—but I’m interested in him as a figure, because before I
knew he was ‘the memes guy,’ I just thought of him as ‘that stuffy old
British dude who’s shitty about Muslims,’ and I’m fascinated by a guy
who’s so on-point about one thing and so wrong about everything else.*

Definitely. Richard Dawkins is funny because, like, my first
introduction to him was some of my religious friends showing me, like,
‘watch this guy get schooled about creationism.’ Going back to the
conversation we were just having, I feel firmly agnostic about almost
everything now. I think that in atheism, there's the same hubris that
there is in religion. It's like you think you know, but nobody knows
anything. Richard Dawkins is funny because he's such an authority figure
for this thing that spiraled completely out of control; so then he, by
nature, doesn't have authority over it.

It's just funny, like how Bukowski says ‘you'll never meet an old
radical.’ There's just a certain erosion that I think happens over time.
I think it entrenches people deeper and deeper into their observed
reality and stops them from imagining others. And then it's funny to see
somebody that was so imaginative, like Richard Dawkins, flipped in a
tweet right now. He's the butt of the joke.

*Right. I mean, in some ways, we do kind of get dumber as we get older —
when we’re young we spend all this time forming synapses and making
connections; and then at some point in adulthood we figure out which
ones are useful, and then the other ones just sort of slowly start to
die off. And I think it happens literally on a neurological level, but I
think it also happens on a more ideological—or I guess the word would be
memetic—level. You get to a certain age and you're an expert in your
chosen field. You know everything there is to know about one thing, and
you know just enough about everything else to make it work. You have an
understanding about how the world works, but it's sort of the ‘Columbus
sailed to America to prove the world was round’ kind of understanding.
It's wrong, but it works as a placeholder until you can learn how it
really is. But the longer you sit with that incorrect understanding as
the objective truth, the more ossified it becomes and the harder it is
to break out of it.*

Yeah, exactly. There is a hidden danger in the economic theory of
specialization, where you look at people as little machines—even if
you're good at more than one thing, you should only do the thing that
brings the most economic utility and let the other people do the other
things. And I think that industrialization has helped us program
ourselves in that direction, but people aren't meant to be that.

And I think that we've seen younger generations kind of fight back
against that a little bit—with the rise of DIY culture and stuff like
that—where it's like, what happened to the Renaissance Man? What
happened to the... you know, you dabble and you study and you grow and
you question and then, ‘hey man, like, I figured out a new field of
botany!’ What happened to *that*?

And it's not that everything's been found out already. I think that
there's a certain danger to the culture of PhDs and very narrow fields
of research and study, now that we have so many more things that are
multidisciplinary. And as we get more robots, I think the skills that we
really need in a post-AI world are the ones that connect dots that a
robot couldn't.

And that's the human stuff. That's where art comes in. And I hope that
art can help lead people to, you know, interact with it more. I don't
like that people are such passive music listeners. I like that there are
more tools to actively make music, because that'll allow me, as a
performer and instrumentalist, to do more things, because now the
listeners will be capable of listening to more things at once because
they've trained their ears. I feel like even if you don't get great at
something, just like the act of doing other stuff, it'll make people and
society as a whole more open, more generous, more well-rounded.

*I think this is a great place to segue back into talking about your
practice. I know you primarily identify as a musician, but to me your
video work feels indispensable to the project. All of your videos look
and feel, unmistakably, like Scoobert Doobert videos, in this
idiosyncratic, almost auteurish way. Did you have experience working
with video before this project started? Or was it just, like, ‘I got
Adobe Creative Suite from work, I guess I'll start fucking around with
it’?*

A little bit of both. Um, funny enough, the day I was born I was on TV,
because my dad was on TV. They filmed me as I came out of the womb with
a big cone head, ‘cause they had to like vacuum suck me out of my mom.
So I had a very misshapen skull for the first few months of life. So
yeah, like, I don't know, video has been a big part of my whole life
growing up; my dad was a cameraman and did stuff on screen too. And so
yeah, I was learning like shots and framing and stuff and like watching
things a little more critically, I guess.

But at the same time, I'm not a film student. I don't really know what
I'm doing. I'm kind of trying to bring, like... you know like Meg White
from the White Stripes?

*She’s my favorite drummer.*

Dude, right?!? Like, there's an appeal to a childlike approach to a
medium. And I'm trying to bring that too. I'm trying to push myself in a
way with it so that, you know, like I find myself I'm getting pretty
decent at it just because I'm trying to keep myself scared with what I'm
doing and intimidated by the vision. But I also try to bring improv to
everything I do. Pretty much every record has got at least one song on
it that’s entirely improvised, at *least* one. And I want to do that
forever. I'm trying to bring the same kind of spirit to the video
editing where it’s just, like, split second, *what if I did this?* Do
it. And then like a day later look back and be like, ‘that's funny.’
Like stuff that you wouldn't be able to logically think out, you just
have to find subconsciously.

I also feel like that's kind of a big thing with memes, right? Like,
sometimes I see memes that are too logical and it doesn’t sit right. I
really like the way gen Z is memeing, because it's so chaotic and it's
so reductive. I love the chaos, but I’m also kind of sad because I worry
about them sometimes. Because sometimes it’s pushed so far that it
doesn't seem like it’s absurdist anymore. Sometimes it just feels really
depressed and dark and sad through an absurdist lens.

But I dunno, as somebody who makes art, my goal would be to pull the
people that are too literal away from the literal, and the people who
are too sad toward the happy, because I think that absurdism and like
retrospection should have a laugh to it, even the darkest things. Like
even some of the worst things in human history, I think that the human
impulse to laugh is one of our greatest strengths just to cope with
existence. And it’s not like I want to just make happy glossy music, but
I hope to bring that sensibility to the videos and to the music and
stuff, so that even when I'm talking about a dark subject, it'd be a
little bit tongue-in-cheek so that, you know, there's a place to land.

*Yeah, absolutely. One of the things that I think is so interesting and
powerful about humor is the reaction is so immediate and visceral.
Someone tells a joke and either you laugh or you don’t, there’s no
faking it. And a joke is often an observation about the world, so when
someone laughs at your joke, it's because they share some of your
underlying assumptions about the way the world works.*

*I mean like so much of the stuff that you're doing is genuinely funny,
but it's always in service of the other stuff that you're grappling
with, like deconstructing the absurdity of modern life and, you know,
Derrida or whatever. Humor can be in service of these like larger things
that don't go down so smoothly without it, you know?*

Definitely, definitely. I think it's interesting how there are certain
things that translate really well across cultures—like character acting,
everybody loves Mr. Bean all over the world. But, like, I go to Japan
and nobody knows who Will Farrell is. A lot of American media gets
consumed in Japan but a lot of American comedy doesn’t land. I want to
try and bring a healthy dose of that to what I'm doing, and hopefully
make stuff that’s cross-cultural. I don't want to get too swept up in
the U.S. and thinking that our problems are the universals.

*Will Farrell is a funny example because, did you see that EuroVision movie that came out like last year? I mean, it wasn’t great; but the
thing that I thought was interesting about that movie was 1) it was
clearly intended for an international audience (i.e. people who watch
EuroVision), and 2) all of the humor is visual. There aren’t really any
funny lines of dialogue, all of the jokes are in the camera tricks or
the staging or all of these other things that are unique to the language
of film; which is great, because it’s kinda rare for American comedies
to meaningfully engage with the medium of film in their humor — it’s
mostly just a camera pointed at people while they tell jokes. It begs
the question of what’s even the point of making something as complicated
and expensive as a movie when the content could just as easily be
delivered through a much simpler medium?*

That's a good way of looking at it. And I think that that's a good way
to kind of flip the narrative, because I know a lot of people are really
bummed, especially directors. I just listened to a podcast where the
director who did the new Billie Holiday movie was lamenting how
everybody should just do superhero movies now.

It’s the same way that I get frustrated with how music can sound very
commoditized, how record labels are just signing competitive acts that
sound similar to another already-successful act, and it ends up
squishing music into a very narrow spectrum.

And I feel like the same thing is happening to film, and film just
doesn't know what it's like yet. They're complaining about having to be
direct-to-streaming, and losing out on the revenue streams. And like
music has had to deal with this since forever. ‘Oh, boo hoo! Netflix
bought your movie!’ Like, I get that you’re gonna make less money, but
you're still gonna make money.

*And people are going to be watching it on a smaller screen, but at
least they’re watching it.*

They’re lamenting the change of experience. There's a certain experience
of going and seeing a movie for the first time in a theater with other
people that are validating your emotions. And I miss that a lot since
the pandemic, so I don’t think that’s going away. But I think it's funny
because music lost that experience, and it’s not coming back. But you
know, we're just going to have to continuously evolve and hopefully find
a bright path. And this pandemic I think has reinforced that in my head.
It's like, there will be black swans… What do we do today? We can’t
control very much.

*And I think on the flip side, another trend I’m noticing in film
discourse, that music was dealing with like 10 years ago (and it was
insufferable, so good luck guys), I feel like film is experiencing
poptimism for the first time now. Which, on its most basic level, like,
that’s valid. Your love of \[whatever popular thing\] is no less valid
than my love of \[whatever unpopular thing\]. Sure. But it also has
people doing some like pretty weird mental gymnastics trying to
politicize every consumer decision they make. It just seems a little
unnecessary, and frustrating for everyone involved. It just becomes
another thing to get angry at strangers on Twitter about.*

Yeah, but I feel like that goes back to control. For a long time we had
this illusion of control that felt safe but boring. Now there are cracks
in that illusion—and the Covid crisis was the biggest, most obvious one,
just like a war would be—and the boredom turns into anxiety. But then
that anxiety either turns to outright fear, which turns to anger, or it
turns into a moment of revelation of growth and community.

And we’ve seen both throughout the course of the pandemic, the highest
high of ‘we're all in this together’—finding out that things like
student loans and rent can just go away; that if we want to, everybody
can get vaccinated, like, for free. There were paradigm-shifting
responses, not just from the policy angle, but like from businesses,
from people, from neighbors. And then it all eroded it into storming the
Capitol.

*Totally. What strikes me most about your album Masks and Monsters is
how it feels almost nostalgic now*—*there was that period in 2020 from
around March to May when it really felt like everyone on planet earth
was dealing with the same problem for the first time ever. It’s like we
were all right on the verge of this incredible epiphany and then just
ran screaming in the other direction.*

![Figure 4: Still from the music video for ‘Why, How, Yeah, Yeah’](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/7.4.jpeg)

<br/>

COVID connected all of us, and I think a lot of people were extremely
uncomfortable with that. Just consider all of the rich people fleeing to
New Zealand. I’ve gotten pretty into learning about billionaire bunkers.
Did they forget they're human?

I guess, hyper-connective moments are terrifying to those that aren’t
used to connecting. Some very literally spend their lives trying to
disassociate from the masses. Why?

Imagine what it would actually be like if aliens landed. I think we just
got a taste of it. For a brief moment, it really felt like we were All
In This Together™. There was something heartwarming while that brief
moment lasted. And it was sad how quickly it evaporated. But it gives me
hope, because we had a glimpse of what a united globe could look like.
We really could solve every problem on this planet if everyone actually
cared. If we stepped out of the damn billionaire bunkers. Figuratively.

So we saw what I think is both the revelation and that acceptance of
these things as artificial. And because they're artificial, we can look
at them rationally rather than just saying ‘this is the way it always
has been and this is the way it always will be.’ We can have a
discussion about our artificial thing rather than a holy thing.

And instead of weaponizing memes to protect what we think is holy, we
can use memes as a tool to poke fun and to show absurdity and to flip
things on their head and unite, even in small communities. And so I
think that there are two logical responses and I'm just trying to put my
weight on the one that is less combative and is more revolutionary,
because I think you can do both. I don't think it has to be a revolution
of killing people. It can be a revolution of thought. If we’re able to
accept the absurd and accept that it’s artificial, then anything is
possible.

*On the subject of revolutions of thought, I want to bring the
conversation back to humor one more time. Humor is a powerful tool for
creating in-groups and out-groups, and some of the worst people in
America have used this to great effect. Do you think there’s a way that
we could use humor to fight back?*

Especially in the West, we tend to think linearly and in binaries.
There’s left and right, with cause-and-effect. One and zero. So, our
natural Western response would be to say, we need to fight the Pepe’s
with an equal-and-opposite force. Some sort of Newtonian retribution.

Dig down deep enough though, and everything *can't* be reduced to 1's
and 0's. It can just appear to be. Like how a movie is just images
moving quickly enough to give the impression of reality. Or a pixel can
give the illusion of a curved line with nothing but blocks to work with.

I'd like to pitch an alt-alt path, for us to be less adversarial and
more absurdist. I mean, we have people flying meme flags storming the
capitol. That’s horrifying, but is the appropriate action to fuel it—or
to laugh at it?

Of course, seeing things that I love weaponized yields a certain
disquieting vibe. But the goal shouldn’t be to take up arms against it.
Instead, what if we neutralized it. What if we left the Nazis punching
air instead of fighting back. What if there was no equal-and-opposite
force. What if?

That’s the ethos, I guess. Take a step back. Laugh at it. Neuter hate.

And remember what we can be together. All of us have a defined and
absolute destiny—death. What do we do with that knowledge? I think we
either turn our fear into anger and anger into hate—or—we can laugh at
it. In that, we can assert control over the uncontrollable.

Like, Socrates laughed on his deathbed. That’s memeable AF.
