---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# On the Prospect of Overcoming Meme-Culture, or, The Last Meme in History

###Åke Gafvelin

Meme culture, at its present stage, consists in an oscillation between
two opposed tendencies. On one hand, it attempts to *rigidify* various
cultural phenomena, through the creation of certain paradigms of
schematic representation: like the dichotomies of virgin/chad,
boomer/zoomer, tradwife/thot, based/cringe, and woke/problematic – to
name but a few. On the other hand, it aims to *dissolve* these same
schemas as soon as they have been widely adopted. This can be inferred
from the fact that the taxonomy of the alt-right and 4chan-associated
‘incel’ is now commonplace in zoomer meme-culture, without there being
any ideological commonality between the two groups. The taxonomy is
quite obviously employed ironically, with the purpose of dissolving a
world-view rather than endorsing it.

In approaching this issue, we might first ask why this
rigidifying/dissolving structure is constructed. The need to categorize
is no new phenomenon – it is plausibly at the core of human cognition –
but I doubt that it has previously been so intimately paired with a
corresponding need to also *dissolve* the very schemes it puts in place.
I take this, however, to have a straightforward explanation in what has
been called the cultural logic of late capitalism. Because capitalism
ultimately – as Marx put it – melts all that is solid into air,
rigidifying memes satisfy our need to get a grip of accelerating social,
technological and economic change. But since memes have themselves
become a commodity, placed right next to advertisers and influencers in
our social-media feeds, they are themselves subject to the same brutal
forces that push the acceleration. Like products competing on a free
market, memes either undergo cycles of radical self-transformation, to
the point of unrecognizability, or otherwise they lose the attention of
their consumers. That is, memes gain their value because they
*rigidify*, but are *dissolved* by the very logic that makes that
feature valuable. Hence, their duality.

A second question, perhaps of more philosophical importance, regards why
this structure is not *de*constructed. It seems reasonable that the
dissolving tendencies of meme-culture might, at some point, come to
dissolve meme-culture itself, just as Marx thought that the logic
inherent to capitalism would lead to its self-destruction. With the fall
of the Soviet Union, however, the *End of History* was proclaimed, and
it became easier *to imagine the end of the world than to imagine the
end of capitalism* (as quipped by Fisher or Zizek or Jameson or your
stoner dorm-mate). Can we imagine the end of meme-culture? This requires
a dialectical analysis, showing how memetic paradigms go through three
stages of upward development until they are finally transgressed and new
paradigms emerge as the result of sideway movements. In the end, the
dialectics of meme-culture finds its ambivalent conclusion in the
equally ambivalent conclusion of this essay.

## Moving Up

![Fig. 0: Source: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distracted_boyfriend>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.1.jpeg)

<br/>

Consider the *Distracted Boyfriend Meme*, featuring (unsurprisingly) a
distracted boyfriend (see Figure 0). Figure 0 can be called **Level 0**
meme in this paradigm—a memetic paradigm being simply a set of memes
that share a family resemblance. Although Figure 0 forms a stable
building-ground for the paradigm, it is clearly not a meme in
the colloquial sense. To create an actual meme, we need to map the
relations between the objects we find in level 0 to the relations of
some other phenomena, thus moving up to **Level 1.** An example of this
is Figure 1, which gains its meaning from the fact that the distracted
boyfriend stands in relation to his girlfriend and the other girl as the
youth stands to capitalism and socialism. Both wish to replace the
former with the latter. We might, then, think of Level 1 memes as
analogous to what logicians call an *object-language*. In such a
language, we are capable of representing relations between various
objects in reality. Figure 1 is simply representing the relation between
the youth, socialism, and capitalism by means of the relations between
the people in Figure 0.

![Fig. 1: Source: <https://en.meming.world/wiki/Distracted_Boyf>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.2.jpeg)

<br/>

One can find an infinite number of possible memes within Level 1, all
with different levels of *dankness* (*dankness* roughly standing for the
quality of a given meme). The thrust of this meme resides partly in the
fact that someone has managed to compare a man feeling the urge to cheat
with the comparative public support for capitalism and socialism.
However, divisions of *dankness* within this level are so culturally
contingent and dependent on personal taste that they do not lend
themselves to rigorous philosophical
analysis.

![Fig. 2: Source: <https://knowyourmeme.com/photos/1287554->](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.3.jpeg)

<br/>

Moving up to **Level 2**, we find memes making reference to other memes.
Consider Figure 2, for example, which refers to memes discovered on
Level 1. We can think of Level 2 as roughly equivalent to what logicians
call a *meta-language*: a language used to talk about languages.[^17chapter16_1]

We can further imagine that Level 2 has an infinite number of possible
layers: Figure 2 is a *meta*-meme, a meme about memes, but we might
imagine meta-meta memes: memes like the meme in Figure 2 (see Figure
2.1); meta-meta-meta memes and so on… It should be noted, however, that
memes do not always become *danker* as they become more
‘meta’: the fundamental joke is already in place by Figure 2. One might
speculate whether this has something to do with the fact that these
memes are not genuinely self-referential. Any attempt at *representing*
a meme M *within* itself would instantaneously move M up one order in
the hierarchy. But then, the meme we are representing is obviously no
longer M.

![Fig. 2.1: Source: <https://knowyourmeme.com/photos/1287554-?>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.4.jpeg)

<br/>

This fits neatly with our (albeit imperfect) analogy of a hierarchy of
languages, which was developed by Tarski precisely because any notion of
a language representing itself runs into paradox (see Figure 2.2).
However, we might still ask if it would be possible, in the search for
ultimate dankness, to move beyond the linguistic limitations that Tarski
put in place. But that requires moving up a level.

To fully comprehend a **Level 3** meme, we need to make a short detour
through Russell and Wittgenstein’s dispute on the distinction between
*saying* and *showing* outlined in the *Tractatus-Logico Philosophicus.*
In his treatise, Wittgenstein sought to unveil the necessary structures
of language. In doing so, he argued that all logical truths, like *it* *rains or it does not rain,* are
vacuous; absolutely true precisely because they say absolutely nothing.
Such tautologies instead gain their significance by *showing* something
about the structure of the language in which they are formulated; in the
case of *it rains or it does not rain*, that the language abides by the
*law of the excluded middle*. A consequence of this view, however, is
that Wittgenstein’s own philosophy is unsayable, since it successfully
formulates the necessary structure of language from within that very
structure. Hence his treatise concludes: *Whereof one cannot speak,
thereof one must be silent*.

![Fig. 2.2: Source: Set Theory Memes for Logically Equivalent Teens](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.5.jpeg)

<br/>

Russell thought this to be a superfluous piece of mysticism. He
suggested in the preface that any quietism could be avoided by
postulating a Tarskian infinite hierarchy of languages, in which the
truth of the *Tractatus* is formulable in a language commenting on the
syntactic properties of the language below it (just like our memes
comment on memes in Level 2). Wittgenstein, however, despised Russell’s
preface, because he didn’t think it did justice to the width of his
philosophical achievement. On Russell’s model, Wittgenstein was trying
to *say* something about a particular language. But that was not his
aim. He was trying to *show* it; and thus utter a truth transcending the
representational scope of any possible language.

With this distinction in place, we can now begin to comprehend a **Level
3** meme. On Level 2, we attempted to *say* something about other memes
by means of *representation* (like the picture under “the other format”
in Figure 2). But Level 3 memes (see Figure 3)[^17chapter16_2] *show* the structure
of all possible memes within its paradigm by simply
instantiating its barren structure,
breaching the limits of any representational scope found within the
hierarchy at Level 2. Figure 3 can thus be seen as the *Tractatus* of
the *Distracted Boyfriend-*paradigm of memes, elucidating the ultimate
structure of its memeological language by embodying it, saying
*nothing.* Russell rejected the *Tractatus* because it would, as
Wittgenstein proclaimed, mean the end of philosophy. Similarly, any
Level 3 meme must finalize the upward movement in its paradigm: when one
has reached it, one must – paraphrasing proposition 6.54 of the
*Tractatus – throw away the ladder one used to climb it*.

![Fig. 3: Source: https://www.emaaneastwood.blogspot.com/2019/11/meme-template-distracted-boyfriend.html](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.6.jpeg)

<br/>

## Moving Sideways

So where does the meme go if it no longer can move upwards? Here, I wish
to introduce the notion of the *sideways* movement into a new paradigm.
Let’s consider the dialectics in the movement from what might be called
the *woke/problematic* paradigm to the *based/cringe* paradigm. These
paradigms obviously do not consist of image-based memes like the
*Distracted Boyfriend*, but they are memes in the sense that they
encapsulate cultural ideas and phenomena in an easily transmittable form
on the internet. Hence, we can try to see if our previous analysis
applies to them.

As the term is understood in popular culture, woke means being “aware of
and actively attentive to important facts and issues (especially issues
of racial and social justice),"[^17chapter16_3] and problematic means rejecting or
being unaware of such issues. Let **Level 0** simply be the values of
‘woke’ and ‘problematic', with **Level 1** memes in this paradigm
assigning the labels *woke* or *problematic* to objects in reality. Let
us now commence our upward journey by using the example of racial color
blindness. On the most naive stage, color blindness is considered woke,
as it makes race irrelevant in describing or assessing a person. But
this is obviously also problematic, for roughly the very same reason –
it leads one to ignore racial injustices. So, the **Level 2** woke
person will rightly reject color blindness, achieving the state of being
*meta-woke –* woke about the problematic nature of Level 1 wokeness. We
can then imagine a further dialectics in which “thinking that ‘color
blindness is woke’ is problematic” becomes problematic (achieving
meta-meta-wokeness), and “thinking that “thinking that ‘color blindness
is woke’ is problematic” is problematic” becomes problematic, and so on.

To climb up to **Level 3**, however, we need to become so woke as to
realize that the woke/problematic paradigm *itself* is not woke enough.
An embodiment of this stage can be found in Dasha Nekrasova and Anna
Khachiyan – the hosts of the American podcast *Red Scare* – who reject
the paradigm as a “liberal-feminist piety” used by people who are
“disgusted and horrified by working-class people.”[^17chapter16_4] Noreen Malone
describes their critiques (perhaps *hot takes* is a more fitting term)
as “putting so much of the language of contemporary feminism and
femininity through a feedback loop \[that\] it becomes meaningless; even
their mocking of it indistinguishable from their organic use of it.”[^17chapter16_5]
Red Scare’s fundamental proposition, that *wokeness* is *problematic,*
builds on the very schemes of representation inherent in the
woke-problematic paradigm itself. It is therefore nonsensical in the
same way that the *Tractatus* is: whatever they are trying to *say* can
only be *shown* to an outside observer. When they reached Level 3, they
threw away the ladder they used to climb it.

Now, when no higher move in the woke/problematic paradigm was possible,
they arguably moved *sideways* into a new rigidifying scheme of
representation: the *based/cringe* paradigm*.* According to Urban
Dictionary, being *based* means “having an opinion without regard for
what other people think, often a controversial opinion but not always”,
implying that one is *cringe* when one shares too many opinions with the
mainstream. The based/cringe paradigm must be understood in reference to
the woke/problematic, as it succeeds it dialectically. However, it also
has its own internal logic. In one way, we might say that based/cringe
inverts woke/problematic: the *bonum* of former – the based – is the
*malum* of latter – the problematic (and vice versa). This logic
provides a simple explanation of how *Red Scare* manages to assign a
positive value to mocking ‘woke feminism’: the very purpose of
based/cringe is to turn woke/problematic on its head.

Similar to what was the case before, the objects of **Level 0** are the
values of ‘based’ and ‘cringe'. And equally alike is the movement
upwards. Geist wakes up on a 4chan board, and “based” is applied to
someone like Ben Shapiro or Jordan Peterson. But that **Level 1** usage
is obviously cringe. So we move up to **Level 2**, achieving
*meta-basedness.* I take it that this is where Geist is located
presently: ‘return to monké,’ is Urban Dictionary’s most up-voted example of something based, and this
clearly mocks the alt-right and /pol/-associated wish to reject
modernity and embrace tradition. We can only speculate what is to come,
but plausibly the paradigm will continue to accelerate its upward
movement in the hierarchy of meta-memes until it realizes that the
based-cringe dichotomy itself is cringe, thus reaching a **Level 3**
basedness (see Figure 4 and Figure 5). But this will, as before, result
in quietism, requiring us to throw away the ladder and move sideways
into a new paradigm. And so memeological history will continue.

![Fig. 4: Source: eSCATological posting, a Facebook group that has now been zucced](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.7.jpeg)

<br/>

## Moving Beyond?

![Fig. 5: Source: <https://youtu.be/VSkPkSYFQ3U>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/16.8.jpeg)

<br/>

The preceding parts of this essay have
sought to describe the workings of memeological history – the point,
however, is to change it. Is meme culture something we ought to leave on
the historical scrap-heap? Don’t get me wrong; I like a good meme just
as much as the next person, and tropes like ‘based’ or ‘woke’ carry
important information about where we are as a culture. But meme-culture
is—dare I say—*toxic*. As soon as we go beyond Level 1, we merely find a
muddle of signs valued far higher than whatever they signify. We turn
into *ironists*, putting quotation-marks over anything asserted,
deconstructing whatever has been constructed, *dissolving* whatever
anyone *rigidifies*. In his *Postmodernity and Its Discontents*, the
late sociologist Zygmunt Bauman likens this (non-)identity to that of a
perpetual tourist, always on the move, safe from any kind of vulnerable
interaction with the fellow human:

> Indeed, tourists worth their salt are the masters supreme of the art
> of melting the solids and unfixing the fixed. First and foremost, they
> perform the feat of not belonging to the place they might be visiting;
> theirs is the miracle of being in and out of place at the same time.
> The tourists keep their distance, and bar the distance from shrinking
> into proximity. It is as if each of them was enclosed in a bubble with
> tightly controlled osmosis; only such things as the occupant of the
> bubble admits may leak in, only such things as he or she allows to go,
> may seep out. Inside the bubble the tourist may feel safe; whatever
> the pulling power of the outside, however sticky or voracious the
> world outside may be, the tourist is protected.[^17chapter16_6]

We might enjoy visiting new places at times, maybe even as much as we
like memes, but no one wants to travel *all the time*. The memeological
nomad embodies the very worst of postmodern culture: always ironising,
never endorsing anything. I think we can all agree that this is both
cringe and problematic. What is based and woke is keeping a distance to
the memes, rather than the human beings they are intended to mock. Doing
so might not only give us a glimpse of the end of meme-culture, but
perhaps the end of irony itself. That, I take to be a good thing.

So we might reject meme-culture on the basis of this critique. But at
this point the reader is invited to worry. The dankest possible meme is
probably a meme that distances itself from the very idea of a meme – a
*dab* on all possible memetic structures. The reader should now wonder:
*is this essay itself a meme?* It does not look implausible. There is a
whole genre of this sort of *theory-posting,* pretentious memes applying
high-brow philosophical theory on low-level phenomena, and this might
just be an essayistic variant. Note also that before this paragraph, it
sought to *rigidify* the dialectics of meme-culture, making it
comprehensible; presently, it is seeking to *dissolve* this very
exposition by suggesting it was all irony. So might it be the case that
this meme (if it is a meme) is embodying the structures of the
dialectics of meme-culture in itself in order to *show* how utterly
*meaningless* it is? For no other reason than *trolololololol…*

Were this essay a **Level 3** meme of all possible memes, it would be
the greatest feat of irony in the history of memes: it should rightly be
dubbed the *last meme of history*. Neither moving *upwards* or to the
*side* of any particular paradigm/hierarchy in our postulated memetic
space, it would move *beyond* the space completely, its very structure
exposing the dialectics of meme-history to be as cynical, nihilistic,
*cringe, problematic* as this essay. The impossibility of this move,
however, is apparent—the essay is obviously unable to properly
transgress the ironic structures it seeks to move beyond if genuinely a
meme. We can only conclude that, whatever this meme (if it is a meme) is
attempting to *say*, it could only *show*. And *whereof one cannot
speak, thereof one must be silent.*

Where does this leave the prospect of overcoming meme-culture?
Plausibly, if we do not put an end to it, the inevitable heat-death of
the universe will do so. But the mere destruction of a thing does not
overcome it; Marx didn’t overcome Hegel when Hegel died: Marx overcame
Hegel (if he ever did) by putting him on his head. Can we put
meme-culture on its head? I do not know. Perhaps any attempt to do so is
itself memetic, an attempt at radical ironizing beyond all dimensions.
With these considerations in mind, I conclude that it is much easier to
imagine the end of the world than the end of meme-culture.[^17chapter16_7]

## References

Bauman, Zygmunt. *Postmodernity and Its Discontents*. New York, New York
University Press, 1997.

Malone, Noreen. “Red Scare Leans Into Nothing. A podcast that offers a
critique of feminism, and capitalism, from deep inside the culture
they’ve spawned.” *The Cut*. October 25, 2018.
<a href="https://www.thecut.com/2018/10/profile-red-scare-podcast.html">https://www.thecut.com/2018/10/profile-red-scare-podcast.html</a>.

Merriam Webster Online. “Woke.” Accessed May, 2021,
<a href="https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/woke">https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/woke</a>.

Myers, Fraser. “Meet the anti-woke left.” *Spiked Online*. July 4, 2019.
<a href="https://www.spiked-online.com/2019/07/04/meet-the-anti-woke-left/">https://www.spiked-online.com/2019/07/04/meet-the-anti-woke-left/</a>

Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1922. *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus*. 1st
edition. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.

[^17chapter16_1]: This analogy, however, is not perfect. Many memes reference both
    memes and actual things in reality, but it is not allowed to
    reference both languages and objects in the ordinary sense of a
    meta-language.

[^17chapter16_2]: The *Top Text Bottom Text* meme is a useful example of memes at
    this level

[^17chapter16_3]: “Woke,” Merriam Webster Online, Accessed May, 2021,
    <a href="https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/woke">https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/woke</a>

[^17chapter16_4]: Fraser Myers, “Meet the Anti-Woke Left,” *Spiked Online,* July 4,
    2019,
    <a href="https://www.spiked-online.com/2019/07/04/meet-the-anti-woke-left/">https://www.spiked-online.com/2019/07/04/meet-the-anti-woke-left/</a>

[^17chapter16_5]: Noreen Malone, “Red Scare Leans Into Nothing. A Podcast that
    Offers a Critique of Feminism, and Capitalism, from Deep Inside the
    Culture They’ve Spawned,” *The Cut,* October 25, 2018,
    <a href="https://www.thecut.com/2018/10/profile-red-scare-podcast.html">https://www.thecut.com/2018/10/profile-red-scare-podcast.html</a>

[^17chapter16_6]: Zygmunt Bauman, *Postmodernity and Its Discontents* (New York: New
    York University Press, 1997), 89-90

[^17chapter16_7]: The use of this quote suggests that this essay could in fact be a
    meme.
