---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# **Deeper and Higher: Memes as Scalar Abstraction**

###Geoffrey Hondroudakis

## How Many Layers Are You On?

![Fig. 1: The 'Layers of Irony' Meme - first posted to the ‘Special Meme Fresh’ Facebook page on October 24th, 2015](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/17.1.jpeg)

<br/>

This is an old meme – which is to say that it’s tired, tiresome,
coopted, boring – it’s well and truly dead. But the vulture of Minerva
flies at dusk, and there’s still carrion to be picked at on this .png.
It’s telling—less for its structure, template, or relation to irony,
post-irony, meta-irony, dada, what have you—than for its (self-derisive
and irreverent) recognition of the stratifications at work in meme
culture. If we (over)read this image, we find it posits a formal
nesting: a fractal or sedimentary structure to memetic diffusion wherein
the reader/maker/distributor exists at some indexed level or geometric
strata within the memetic ecology. There are gradations and frames to
parse, a whole rippling architecture of information and affect. Memes,
like onions, ogres, and irony, have *layers. *

There are other memes that you could point to as examples here: the
expanding brain or iceberg-tiers templates are obvious, if somewhat
uninteresting candidates. These index increasing levels of complexity,
abstraction, sociocultural volatility (the hotness of a take), or
subcultural specificity. They’re about positing distinctions, grafting a
social ladder together out of disparate positions or interests, or
exploding these ladders via recursive self-parody. But beyond the
relative self-reflexivity of particular meme templates, the larger
question has more to do with the structure and functions of the memetic
*ecology*. Surrounding the ‘layers of irony’ are the layers of
*circulation* – which is not to say that memes are not about content.
Yes, what memes are about is often more to do with their circulation:
relative value is indexed to the number of likes, adaptations,
reverberations. But this is not because content is *irrelevant,*
requiring us to re-tread McLuhanite reversals. The significance of
circulation and exchange in memes – their evolutionary function as
asignifying network symbionts – is precisely because they *mediate*
signifying content with impersonal scales. The particular quality of the
online memetic ecology is its inclusion of both registers. Meme culture
is a process of mediation latticing the gulf between the scales of
affect and identity, information, and social system.

Essentially, the memetic ecology at large serves to mediate the enormous
flows of information and affect, enacting a sorting, matching, and
grammatizing process on public affairs. Every major event, development,
or process carving space in the milieu is refigured by a memetic shadow
– which in turn serves to identify politico-aesthetic lines of division
and commonality, particularity and universality. This method of
apprehension and address can also work to unpin existing assumptions,
opening ruptures in a social fabric or igniting viral surges of
discontent. So, like the cultural and political landscapes, we can
expect much of the online memetic ecology to be riven by similarly
endless divisions, yet marked by equally interminable rehearsals of the
same. The array of memetic responses to anything at all is dizzying,
kaleidoscopic, while remaining in many cases depressingly predictable.
This is the problem that memes both participate in and attempt to solve:
there is too much stuff and it is all the same.

## The Problem of Scale

The internet is very large. Trivial to say, but it registers important
phenomenological, cognitive, infrastructural, and informatic facts. For
one, information and choice overload are significant factors inflecting
everyday interactions. Whether reading or watching news,[^18chapter17_1] buying things,[^18chapter17_2] browsing a social media feed, or engaging in any
number of other activities on the internet, there is a confrontation
with cascading flows of activity. Adding further to this is the sense
that there are not only innumerable objects and possibilities within an
individual’s own ambit, but that there are also enormous numbers of
*other* domains for structuring information, each with their own norms
and interests and endeavors. This may go some way in explaining why
people are so willing to hand over their informational selves – and
control over swathes of their libidinal and attentional architectures –
to platforms. Something of a Faustian bargain (or perhaps a wish upon a
monkey’s paw) in which the curation and commodification of sociality is
a feature, not a bug.[^18chapter17_3] In any case, what this overload and its
subsequent (and ongoing) platformizations show is that the internet
exists at extraordinarily large scales, but also contains a vast number
of coextensive and competing local scales – which in turn serve to
interface with us as users on scales more granular than our gestalt
selves.

This granularity, as the increased specificity and sheer number of data
points operationalized in digitality, is one of the primary mechanisms
of digital power. This has not gone unnoticed by net critics. Jodi Dean
wrote in 2010 of the fragmentation associated with internet platforms
capitalizing on the partial quality of drives. By encouraging engagement
at the level of drive, targeting the looping, feedback-heavy repetitions
involved at this scale of the psyche, the subject is dis-articulated as
a coherent scale. The drives ‘fragment and disperse as they satisfy
themselves via a variety of objects’,[^18chapter17_4] and the amplification of this
process is the very means of capture in attentional circuits. In this
way, platforms avoid interfacing with an individual who has a coherent
sense of self and robust powers of executive decision over their own
desires. Instead, they pick at the scalar edges and discontinuities
within this very subject: Zuckerberg loves nothing more than to harvest
and monetize your inconstant irregularities.

Social media crested what might be considered its ideological high point
in the early 2010s: recall the now naïve-seeming hyperbole surrounding
the supposedly radical democratizing potential of Web 2.0 platforms. In
the decade of disillusionment that has followed, the kind of net
critique promulgated by Dean and others has become more widespread.
Addiction, drive-based capture, and fragmentation of coherence is now
widely recognized as the *modus operandi* of platforms. Social media: a
kind of slot machine or neurochemical honeytrap by which Facebook or
Twitter might bypass the intentionality and self-legislation of the
coherent self, treating more directly with the granular scales of a
fragmented, distracted user’s psychic pieces.[^18chapter17_5] Of course, this
targeting of the molecular elements of subjectivity—its ‘pre-personal
and supra-personal activities’—may indeed by the mode of domination
particular to capitalism as such, only now attaining new specificity and
speed. [^18chapter17_6] In any case, it is clear that the scales at which Web
2.0—and by extension memes—operate include those registers more
elemental than identity, traversing the fragmentary drives and their
social reverberations. Inasmuch as memes flow along the circuits of the
platformized internet, they too participate in the whittling of
attentional slivers from subjectivities, and the disassembly of
interests and desires into drives and obsessions. But this granularity
serves in turn to mediate back up the stack, converting into
suprapersonal gestalts, vast information vectors and stocks and their
material-political correlates.[^18chapter17_7]

While the attentional rhythms of social media are associated with a
hijacking of these granular scales, they remain implicated in the
linking of these granularities to larger structural layers. Brian
Spitzberg identifies a multilayer structure of meme diffusion and
selection, passing through the meme, the individual, the network, the
society, and the geo-technical scale.[^18chapter17_8] These operate as identifiable
scales of operation: both epistemic constructs that allow purchase upon
a particular set of observable phenomena, and actual technical and
communicational frames that have their own dynamics, constraints, and
causal factors. Spitzberg shows, using this model, that the success or
failure of individual memes is dependent on a multi-level process of
selection and exchange. It passes through multiple scales, each of which
feeds back into the others, while retaining a certain ontological
stability and coherence that makes their own field incommensurable to
the others. Put simply: memes don’t just care about individual people,
but their social groups, infrastructures, protocols, and environments.
Each of these things are distinct, identifiable frames of operation that
make different abstractions from their mediating relations: nations care
about different things to companies; people care about different things
to infrastructures.

This framework is geared to target the processes of diffusion and
selection (the nebulous question of meme ‘success’). Consequently, it is
only part of the total picture of what memes are and do, and so might be
supplemented with scalar theories targeting other aspects of
computer-mediated communication. For a scalar schema more interested in
geopolitics, consider the
User&lt;Interface&lt;Address&lt;City&lt;Cloud&lt;Earth structure of
Benjamin Bratton’s *The Stack.*[^18chapter17_9] Here, the scalar frames that
Spitzberg identifies as
individual&lt;network&lt;society&lt;geo-technical are paralleled by
Bratton’s subtly different layers, addressing subtly different concerns
despite their similar interest in the socio-technical architectures of
digital media. If *The Stack* is a model of the model that is planetary
computation, where do the memes circulate here? And, perhaps worth
distinguishing, where in either of these scalar structures might we
identify the difference between a particular meme, and that meme’s
*template* – for example, the difference between a particular iteration
of the expanding brain and the general use of the expanding brain
structure in general?

All this goes to say that, while the generation of layers appears
necessary, it’s a tricky and context-dependent business. It requires
unifying structural analysis with careful attention to the particular
under examination. Because of this delicate balance, the question of
identifying the constitution and function of the particular scales
implicated by memes goes beyond the scope of what I can cover here. What
is clear, however, is that there is a communicational and informational
function to memes that traverses multiple scales of operation. As
Spitzberg argues:

> memes are much more than the mere ‘inside jokes or pieces of hip
> underground knowledge’ spread through social media, and are instead,
> the fundamental feature of socially and technologically propagated
> knowledge.[^18chapter17_10]

Whether they are truly *the* fundamental feature may be up for debate,
but there is certainly a sense in which they serve a fundamental
function in mediating the affective, social, network, structural,
evental, and informatic dimensions of the internet. Theorizing this
involves less an identification of particular scalar registers (though
it is useful to be able to heuristically speak of such things within
certain contexts) and more an identification of the principles of
*mediation* between scales. What does the meme ecology *do* for our
social, psychic, informatic and political scales?

## Memetic Mapping

At the heart of the meme is a dialectic between specificity and
fungibility, the particular and the universal, the concrete individual
and the totality. The good meme must strike a balance between concrete
specificity and formal legibility: it has to feel unique, innovative,
speak directly to me, while at the same time relating me to the
informatic milieu as a whole. The good meme makes me feel the
particularity of my own being, figured (sympathetically or
antagonistically, recuperatively or disruptively) in relation to general
form. Historically, we could point to various systems for suturing the
individual to the totality and providing them a place within it. We
might speak of collective protentions as the sociocultural matrix of
memory and meaning projected into a shared future; or a cosmotechnics
that unifies technical process, moral action and cosmic order, the whole
apparatus of religion, writing, culture or imagined community.[^18chapter17_11] But
of course, most grand narratives withered some time in the last century,
while older artistic forms like literature have diminished in their
ability to cognitively map the social totality.[^18chapter17_12] This disjunction
leaves conspiracies and fanaticisms to fill the symbolic void while the
old colonial systems continue apace despite their symbolic cancellation
or revision. If an individual is unwilling to imbibe such fantasies,
then what options remain? Memes that are out of date almost immediately,
souring and turning stale within a cultural blink. An in-advance
obsolescence associated with the relentless generation of a new that
remains either nostalgic or incoherent[^18chapter17_13]. Bernard Stiegler described
this inability to fix a common system of meaning as ‘the barbarism
specific to the absence of epoch \[which\] consists in always
*outstripping and overtaking* such systems, so that they seem always
already futile, *vain*, the ruined remnants of what would have been only
*pure vanity*, where care and attention arrive always too late – in
vain.’[^18chapter17_14]

Still, impoverished as our possibilities may be, they bear analysis and
might yet offer fruits that exceed a more old-guard critical theory
pessimism. Consider a memetic encounter. I’m scrolling Facebook, and my
eyes pass over an image, structured in one of the many
Approval/Disapproval templates (Drake, Geordi La Forge, Kombucha Girl,
etc). The negative pole: a public figure’s poor behavior; the positive
pole: a rival public figure’s good behavior. Alternatively, the two
poles could identify options for something intimately personal but banal
– perhaps two contrasting ways of eating chips or differing sleeping
habits. In either case, I might register a sense of amusement at the
framing if I find it agreeable or relatable – or perhaps I might have an
oppositional response, disagreeing with its structure, or feeling the
poles should be reversed. I might register approval by sharing,
disapproval by commenting, or indifference by lack of engagement.
Whatever action is taken, it registers as feedback within various
systems, while also functioning as a self-registering action for myself.

In addition to the much-discussed algorithmic data-gathering, my
encounter with the meme functions as an affective, barely conscious
registering of affiliation or opposition, recognition or refusal,
enjoyment or indifference. A more abstract, ‘avant-garde’ meme, such as
those so often peddled by pages such as Special Meme Fresh (the creator
of this article’s opening example) may seem more divorced from such
processes of sociocultural affiliation. Yet the legibility of such an
aesthetic form always remains (at least in part) a question of its
relationship to the larger aesthetic culture. Most crucially: a
significant characteristic of memes, more than most other forms of
cultural production, is their emphasis on shareability, emulability, and
sociality. To be an internet meme, a digital object must first be
*circulated* via memetic exchange, thereby engaging in the social,
technical, and symbolic mediations this entails. It is then by the
registering, interpretation, evaluation, and participation within this
that I in turn recuperate the mediations of informatic milieu back down
to general and then individual affect.

Thus the meme is neither semiotic object nor asignifying network: it is
the very mediation of the two that gives the meme its *raison d'etre*.
Part of the function of memetic exchange is to provide a proximate
calibration of the affects and symbolic structures of individuals to the
general informatic milieu. The meme indexes – but also provides specific
contexts upon – ambient sociocultural forces, events, trends, and
structures. We might say, somewhat provocatively, that memetic form is a
codec: memes are a practice of compression and format-matching. The meme
compresses an informatic soup into a more easily processed unit. It
takes the inscrutable flows of global culture, politics, and sociality
and renders them expressed in a format that runs on the OS of affects
and emotional responses. Another analogy: memetic ecologies perform
functions similar to a Hayekian notion of markets, in that they
immanently calculate the emotional/affective valence of general trends
in production and material events via the processes of exchange. They
(proximately) solve the ‘pricing problem’ of information overload in the
sphere of representations.

But, just like economic markets, meme ecologies are riddled with
deceptive actors, pernicious institutions, perverse incentives. Also
just like markets, meme ecologies are prone to self-destructive feedback
loops: bubbles and crashes. If the meme ecology is a method for
calculating the affective-personal significance of everything going on
in the infosphere, then QAnon is a self-producing catastrophe of a
bubble, crash, and bank run. Yet even trying to draw a simple genealogy
is reductive, risking reification of partial pictures, or its own
memetic backlash. A possible sequence: The meme: the election was a
fraudulent attack on democratic institutions // the event: a dangerous
mobbing of a major democratic seat of power // the meme: Trump attempted
a coup // the event: a significant memetic player is removed from the
milieu // the meme: tech giants have disappeared a president. A
reasonably coherent picture internally, but hopelessly flawed. Even
setting aside the question of which framings are true and which are not,
it is difficult to even tell where the memes stop and the events begin.
The scales are nested and interlinked, hopelessly bound up in the
precession of simulacra’.[^18chapter17_15] You might even speak of them as
hyperstitional, wherein the ideas embedded in memes serve to bring about
the worlds they articulate.[^18chapter17_16]

The problem, here, is that in a similar fashion to the abstractions of
the market, the abstractions operating at the template, community, and
platform level act recursively upon meme selection according to
different pressures, incentives, and structural conditions. Memes begin
as individual signifying objects, but soon operate as a self-modifying
and actively competing abstraction. Nowhere in an individual image, gif,
or video is the meme itself – as an isolated object it is just an image,
video, or file. It only begins to operate as abstraction once it becomes
legible *as meme* via the material process of exchange. Users share
copies and create adaptations or emulations, commenting liking, sharing,
upvoting, or not; algorithms optimized for attentional harvests gather
and interpret these signals, then funnel memes to eyes via a complex
real-time backend. Before the meme can be understood in terms of the
abstraction of the memetic, it must be sufficiently processed via
exchange to attain legibility to human pattern recognition. By this
point, to declare a meme a meme is to announce what has already
occurred: it is an abstraction that does not have its origins in
thought.

## ‘Real Shit’: Memes and Real Abstraction

It is tempting, when discussing the multiple scales or levels of an
abstraction, to focus on what is most *real* in it. What is the reality
that underpins the abstraction? Or, perhaps, the ideality of the
abstraction is real, to the *exclusion* of all other reality: a kind of
transcendental critique that takes anything outside of the abstraction
as unknowably noumenal. Perhaps, as some have done, we can see in memes
a sense in which the mode of their circulation is the true message: ‘the
overarching role of memes as mode of propagation of culture is the
ultimate cause (and driver) for engaging in this multimodal meme.’[^18chapter17_17]
What I am trying to argue here is somewhat different to this. It is not
that the affective scale of an individual’s response to a meme is unreal
or irrelevant; it is not that the content of a meme’s signification, or
its existence as a media(ted) object, does not matter. Rather, the point
of addressing the other scales of memetic functioning is to point to the
mediating process *between* these scales: it is significant for how it
mediates these multiple levels of abstraction, bridging or dividing
them, rupturing or uniting them, but always interacting across these
systemic divisions.

It is in this sense that memes operate as *real abstractions*. They are
abstractions that operate by virtue of a fundamental material process,
but are not *reducible* to this process, and in fact recursively iterate
and rupture the situation. The term is one originating with Alfred
Sohn-Rethel, whose primary thesis was ‘that commodity exchange is an
original source of abstraction’,[^18chapter17_18] serving to ground and inform the
scientific, calculative and philosophic abstractions of (at the very
least) Western modernity. There are elements of Sohn-Rethel’s argument
that are less easily defended, but the primary insight with theoretical
purchase today is his account of how a Marxian notion of abstraction is
rooted in material processes of exchange and circulation, while
recognizing that these abstractions are then *real* – they are not
phantasms but properties emerging out of material organization. Of
course, this materialism cuts both ways: as much as material conditions
cannot be hand-waved away by a change in consciousness, so too are
abstractions persistently effective themselves. As Alberto Toscano puts
it, real abstraction is a view of ‘abstraction not as a mere task,
fantasy, or diversion, but as a force operative in the world’.[^18chapter17_19] Such
an account gives theoretical grounding to the process of how ‘events
evoke memes that generate new memes, or memes generate new events’,[^18chapter17_20]
a dialectical picture of social-material process.

So an analogy to markets as immanent calculation and informatization
mechanisms may be less speculative than it otherwise might appear. Like
the principles of commodity exchange, the circulation of memes
establishes a certain general abstractive principle of online cultures:
an informatic indexing and cultural symbolizing that heuristically
gathers and disperses the flows of affect and information. Each
individual act of memetic circulation and valuation serves as signals
within this system, encoding and recoding across media to produce a form
of mediation that bridges the scales of the subpersonal, personal,
network, community, infrastructural, and geopolitical (however you might
constitute these frames). The particular architecture here varies on
context, but the unchanging fact of the memetic is a mediation between
otherwise incommensurable scales of abstraction – an affective, drive
oriented unconscious and its subjective gestalt, to the informatic
registers of technical media, communications, and material conditions.
This mediation is itself active, structuring and restructuring as it
recursively incorporates and adjusts to the inevitable ruptures and
contingencies of billions of people and gigantic technical systems.

## Conclusion

So, what do we have? Memes are, or could be:

-   An immanent calculation and iterative production of socio-cultural
    value, serving to mediate the scales of the personal/symbolic to the
    impersonal/systemic, from individual specificity to info-cultural
    totality.

-   Consequently, a generation of recursive effects upon each of the
    terms involved in this mediation, whereby each scale is both fixed
    and disrupted as the process iterates.

Here we have abstractions that act upon, and perhaps *constitute* those
things they are ostensibly abstracting. Toscano: ‘the specificity of
contemporary post-Fordist capitalism… is precisely to be found in the
abstract connections, or real abstractions, that make society
cohere.’[^18chapter17_21] Our memes have weight in that they mediate the warp and
weft of this coherence – and its failures. While they retain this
regularizing function, it would be overstating the case to suggest that
we can simply commune with the memes and achieve a reading of the
totality – the difficulties of our past modes of cognitive mapping
remain. The text always exceeds our grasping, and in turn it appears
that memes have dreams of their own, dredged from our unconscious,
spliced with informatic regularization, and perhaps injected with a shot
of the immanent material outside. The stacks go deep and high here, but
they are also modular and malleable. The levels of memery are made of
sand – they might be furnace-blasted and soldered into regular
circuitries, but they retain the memory of the dunes, and all the
atomistic changeability that entails.

## References

Baudrillard, Jean. *Simulacra and Simulation*. Translated by Sheila
Faria Glaser. Michigan: University of Michigan Press, 1994.

Bratton, Benjamin H. *The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty*.
Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2015.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262029575.001.0001">https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262029575.001.0001</a>.

Dean, Jodi. *Blog Theory: Feedback and Capture in the Circuits of
Drive*. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010.

Dolata, Ulrich. “Privatization, Curation, Commodification: Commercial
Platforms on the Internet.” *Österreichische Zeitschrift Für Soziologie*
44, no. 1 (2019): 181–97. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11614-019-00353-4">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11614-019-00353-4</a>.

Fisher, Mark. *Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?* Zero Books,
2009.

Hui, Yuk. *The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in
Cosmotechnics*. Urbanomic, 2016.

Jameson, Fredric. *Signatures of the Visible*. New York: Routledge,
1992.

Lazzarato, Maurizio. *Signs and Machines: Capitalism and the Production
of Subjectivity*. Translated by Joshua David Jordan. Los Angeles:
Semiotext(e), 2014.

Li, Chia Ying. “Why Do Online Consumers Experience Information Overload?
An Extension of Communication Theory.” *Journal of Information Science*
43, no. 6 (2017): 835–51. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551516670096">https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551516670096</a>.

Noys, Benjamin. *Malign Velocities: Accelerationism and Capitalism*.
Zero Books, 2014.

Rossolatos, George. “The Ice-Bucket Challenge: The Legitimacy of the
Memetic Mode of Cultural Reproduction Is the Message.” *Signs and
Society* 3, no. 1 (2015): 132–52. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1086/679520">https://doi.org/10.1086/679520</a>.

Schmitt, Josephine B., Christina A. Debbelt, and Frank M. Schneider.
“Too Much Information? Predictors of Information Overload in the Context
of Online News Exposure.” *Information Communication and Society* 21,
no. 8 (2018): 1151–67. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2017.1305427">https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2017.1305427</a>.

Sohn-Rethel, Alfred. *Intellectual and Manual Labour: A Critique of
Epistemology*. The Macmillan Press, 1978.

Spitzberg, Brian H. “Toward a Model of Meme Diffusion (M3D).”
*Communication Theory* 24, no. 3 (2014): 311–39.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/comt.12042">https://doi.org/10.1111/comt.12042</a>.

Stiegler, Bernard. *The Age of Disruption*, 2019.

———. *The Neganthropocene*. Translated by Daniel Ross. London: Open
Humanities Press, 2018.

Toscano, Alberto. “The Open Secret of Real Abstraction.” *Rethinking
Marxism* 20, no. 2 (2008): 273–87.
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/08935690801917304">https://doi.org/10.1080/08935690801917304</a>.

Wark, McKenzie. *Capital Is Dead: Is This Something Worse?* New York:
Verso, 2019.

Zuboff, Shoshana. *The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a
Human Future at the New Frontier of Power*. New York: PublicAffairs,
2019.

[^18chapter17_1]: Josephine B. Schmitt, Christina A. Debbelt, and Frank M.
    Schneider, “Too Much Information? Predictors of Information Overload
    in the Context of Online News Exposure,” *Information Communication
    and Society* 21, no. 8 (2018): 1151–67,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2017.1305427">https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2017.1305427</a>.

[^18chapter17_2]: Chia Ying Li, “Why Do Online Consumers Experience Information
    Overload? An Extension of Communication Theory,” *Journal of
    Information Science* 43, no. 6 (2017): 835–51,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551516670096">https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551516670096</a>.

[^18chapter17_3]: Ulrich Dolata, “Privatization, Curation, Commodification:
    Commercial Platforms on the Internet,” *Österreichische Zeitschrift
    Für Soziologie* 44, no. 1 (2019): 187–88,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11614-019-00353-4">https://doi.org/10.1007/s11614-019-00353-4</a>.

[^18chapter17_4]: Jodi Dean, *Blog Theory: Feedback and Capture in the Circuits of
    Drive* (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010), 59.

[^18chapter17_5]: Shoshana Zuboff, *The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight
    for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power* (New York:
    PublicAffairs, 2019), 451.

[^18chapter17_6]: Maurizio Lazzarato, *Signs and Machines: Capitalism and the
    Production of Subjectivity*, trans. Joshua David Jordan (Los
    Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2014), 32.

[^18chapter17_7]: McKenzie Wark, *Capital Is Dead: Is This Something Worse?* (New
    York: Verso, 2019), 88.

[^18chapter17_8]: Brian H. Spitzberg, “Toward a Model of Meme Diffusion (M3D),”
    *Communication Theory* 24, no. 3 (2014): 318,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/comt.12042">https://doi.org/10.1111/comt.12042</a>.

[^18chapter17_9]: Benjamin H. Bratton, *The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty*
    (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2015), 11,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262029575.001.0001">https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262029575.001.0001</a>.

[^18chapter17_10]: Spitzberg, “Toward a Model of Meme Diffusion (M3D),” 312.

[^18chapter17_11]: See Bernard Stiegler, *The Neganthropocene*, trans. Daniel Ross
    (London: Open Humanities Press, 2018), 257.; Yuk Hui, *The Question
    Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in Cosmotechnics*
    (Urbanomic, 2016), 19–20.

[^18chapter17_12]: Fredric Jameson, *Signatures of the Visible* (New York:
    Routledge, 1992), 74.

[^18chapter17_13]: Mark Fisher, *Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?* (Zero
    Books, 2009), 57–59.

[^18chapter17_14]: Bernard Stiegler, *The Age of Disruption*, 2019, 21.

[^18chapter17_15]: Jean Baudrillard, *Simulacra and Simulation*, trans. Sheila Faria
    Glaser (Michigan: University of Michigan Press, 1994), 1.

[^18chapter17_16]: Benjamin Noys, *Malign Velocities: Accelerationism and
    Capitalism* (Zero Books, 2014), 41.

[^18chapter17_17]: George Rossolatos, “The Ice-Bucket Challenge: The Legitimacy of
    the Memetic Mode of Cultural Reproduction Is the Message,” *Signs
    and Society* 3, no. 1 (2015): 148, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1086/679520">https://doi.org/10.1086/679520</a>.

[^18chapter17_18]: Alfred Sohn-Rethel, *Intellectual and Manual Labour: A Critique
    of Epistemology* (The Macmillan Press, 1978), 28.

[^18chapter17_19]: Alberto Toscano, “The Open Secret of Real Abstraction,”
    *Rethinking Marxism* 20, no. 2 (2008): 274,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/08935690801917304">https://doi.org/10.1080/08935690801917304</a>.

[^18chapter17_20]: Spitzberg, “Toward a Model of Meme Diffusion (M3D),” 328.

[^18chapter17_21]: Toscano, “The Open Secret of Real Abstraction,” 282.
