---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# **Your Feed is a Battleground: A Field Report on Memetic Warfare in Turkey**

###Sarp Özer

As a child, I lived with my mother's younger brother who was a fan of
rock music thanks to Metallica’s popularity in the late 1980s. Even
though I encountered him in our living room rather than on social media,
he was the influencer of yesterday to me. Though it should be noted that
he never said, ‘if you like this, you will like that’. Since nobody gave
me a tutorial to upgrade my suave game, I intuitively set out to parrot
him starting from the looks. I started wearing black or monotone outfits
and favoring denim pieces. While working on my attitude, I noticed some
hand gestures he was flashing to his friends which are commonly known as
the horns and peace gestures. At that time, I was not able to decipher
these enigmatic salutations, but it seemed to work like a charm to
indicate that one was cool.

![Fig. 1. Author’s childhood portrait while flashing the peace gesture. Date unknown.](imgs/20.1.jpg)

<br/>

To execute the horns gesture, one should have the pinky and index
fingers pointing upwards while the middle and ring fingers should be
folded and pressed within the knuckle and fixed in place by the thumb.
On some occasions, like group photographs, making a V-shaped peace
gesture was also very popular. The first time I tried making the horns
gesture in front of my uncle, I had him rolling on the floor laughing at
me: this ambiguous hand gesture would deliver different meanings if
finger positions were altered even slightly. In fact, a very similar
hand gesture already exists in Turkey. Called the howling wolf, it is
the foremost symbol of the National Movement Party (MHP). The difference
between the horns and the wolf is that, for the wolf, the middle and
ring fingers point upfront along with the thumb. Thus, index and short
fingers represent the ears of the wolf while the rest form the canine’s
nose and mouth.

Completely unrelated to the horns salutation, the howling wolf gesture,
as well as the animal itself, is among the most controversial images in
the history of Turkish politics. Even though scholars and politicians
strive to prove that its position within the iconography of Turanism
means no harm, it is nevertheless widely associated with Islamist,
ultra-nationalist, and neo-fascist movements such as the Grey Wolves
Association, which rose to prominence during the late 1970s’ political
violence in Turkey, resulting in the 1980 military coup. The ambiguity
between the horns and wolf is akin to the swastika symbol conveying a
meaning within certain Buddhist cultures, among others, that differs
markedly from its appropriated use in Nazi Germany. The Japanese heavy
metal-idol fusion band called BabyMetal also uses the same gesture of
the wolf in a completely different context. Not affiliated with Turanism
in any way, BabyMetal’s kitsune (fox in Japanese) gesture shows that
images live many lives at once in different people’s minds. After all,
hand gestures originate from symbols that represent things not visible
to the eye by association or convention. They stand for ideas, objects,
or relationships, serving as visual shorthands. These symbols, however,
might not immediately communicate with their viewer on first eye
contact. Sometimes they carry encrypted messages that require clearance
which might be obtained through proof of loyalty, initiation, calling,
etc. That's why religious groups, esoteric communities, and political
movements alike make use of them to deliver messages to the masses, and
also to ideologically condition younger generations.

The wolf in the context of Turkey could be considered both a symbol and
a meme. It is a unit of cultural transmission. One does not need to
subscribe to the nationalist perspective to know about its fictive
racial significance tied to the Turkish identity. Produced and
reproduced both by the state and citizens, it is an ever-present image
that never goes out of fashion. This viral image may be archaic, yet it
remains impactful as it is commonly displayed on online platforms and in
public spaces. The ideology behind it holds substantial political power
and therefore enforces its presence within public memory. As a hand
gesture, the wolf is free of cost, easy to learn, and simple enough to
perform. The same conditions apply to circulating it on social media in
the form of an image macro. Since visual forms of communication are
instrumental to disseminate messages within the wider public, images
with such potency become weaponized in politics and other fields which
rely heavily on perception management to engineer citizen consent. Today
these operations are referred to as memetic warfare, occurring on a
social media battlefield. They are motivated by competition over
narrative, with the aim of obtaining social control. Unlike
cyberwarfare, memetic warfare’s concern is not related to data but to
the seizure of the psychological space at the grand narrative level,
taking control of public opinion to establish advantage over an opponent
in a manner akin to psychological warfare.

The primary objective of memetic warfare is not to come up with the most
convincing arguments but to debunk the opposing parties’ ideas by any
means necessary. There are no rules of engagement on this battlefield.
The lower the blow is, the more attention it gets. Such content gets a
lot more interaction than statements written in a fair play fashion. As
far as the history of digital political campaigns goes, the internet
operates as a space of collective self-confusion. On social media, it is
taken for granted that there is no smoke without fire. Under these
circumstances, search engine listings could be considered publicly
visible conduct sheets. If enough mud is thrown at a wall (or somebody’s
reputation), some will stick. The internet forgets nobody’s deeds as
long as caches of inactive sites remain accessible.

After ruling Turkey for twenty years with an iron gauntlet, the
president of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s internet search results are
flooded with content portraying him as a corrupt, racist, and
authoritarian politician. Opinion polling for the 2023 Turkish general
election indicates that Erdoğan’s popularity has taken a dive.[^21chapter20_1] The discontent is especially observable among internet-savvy
younger generations.[^21chapter20_2] Since their consent is impossible to forcefully
obtain, it needs to be engineered. Rather than making a genuine effort
to earn approval, Erdoğan’s propaganda team started to invest in a
fully-fledged propaganda war, with a special focus on social media.
There has been an extreme proliferation of overt offensive accounts run
by hired users manifesting hostility on social media platforms to
support Erdoğan’s cause. These include doxxing, identity policing, and
digital lynching which even extends to tracking down and physically
harming dissident politicians.

These state-backed social media warriors popularly named Ak Troller
(white trolls)[^21chapter20_3]. Originating from a translation error, the zombie
army called white walkers in *Game of Thrones* was named ‘Ak Gezenler’
in Turkish subtitles. This became a meme that portrays Erdoğan as the
zombie king an over-ambitious leader who is not satisfied with Turkey
and won’t stop until Westeros is conquered. However, this meme does not
only target him, but also his voter base. There is a stinging insult
behind this that hurts AKP supporters by suggesting there is an absence
of subjectivity amongst those who do as Erdoğan bids—akin to zombie
armies.

![Fig. 2. A meme example mocking the style of AKP propaganda posters featuring the Night King, the supreme leader of White Walkers from the Game of Thrones series. Translates as: ‘Redemption and Ascension with kind support of the president we are resurrecting the Ottoman.’ Meme archived from Uludağ Sözlük. Posted by ‘theoutsider’ under the subsection ‘akgezenler vs the akp secmeni’ on 27.08.2017. Image
available at: <ahttps://www.uludagsozluk.com/k/ak-gezenler-vs-akp-se%C3%A7meni/>](imgs/20.2.jpg)

<br/> 

Ak as a prefix has not only spawned the AK Troll term. It is in such
widespread use in daily life that it has become a memetic pattern
itself. There are a great many compound words that derive from the word
AK. The rule is simple: if one seeks to state one’s loyalty to Erdoğan,
naming a business or a legal entity by adding the AK prefix to the title
sends a message. Even Erdoğan named his multi-million palace Aksaray
(White Palace). The same formula is applied for mockery. One could play
with it by adding AK to words, names, and titles to ridicule cases
related to nepotism, corruption, funky Islamo-Turkic aesthetics, or fake
news. In short, tongue-in-cheek uses of AK ridicule Erdoğan’s obsession
with being powerful and rich, which has become an essential part of the
decadent conservative culture he developed in the last two decades. As a
fundamentalist Muslim, he preaches about being just and fair yet goes
full-on YOLO by living a lavish life, accumulating unfathomable wealth
that would be impossible to make only as a president. With enough
financial resources at his disposal, rallying supporters or opportunists
that are willing to get their hands dirty is an easy task. But keeping
their cover intact is not so simple. The existence of paramilitary
forces is publicly known in Turkey—both physical and digital.

The state-sponsored web brigades are reported to be formed by
recruitments made from the AKP youth unit, TÜGVA, and its ilk. Türkiye
Gençlik Vakfı (Turkey Youth Foundation) is an association that critics
claim is run as an astroturfing entity.[^21chapter20_4] To stay institutionally
incognito, these operations are not run in-house but commissioned to
third parties. Camouflaged as advertising companies or public relations
agencies, they discreetly operate under the radar, working from domestic
contexts to not leave any traces behind that would lead to AKP.[^21chapter20_5]

Operating in different ways and at different scales, some of the
individual sock puppets have transitioned from acting as lone wolves to
forming organized cyber paramilitaries. Formed on Telegram in 2020,
Ebabiller (The Apodiformes) consists of a massive assault team that
operates through social media. They orchestrate bans of accounts of
dissident politicians, journalists, or citizens, but also run hashtag
operations with their expansive retweet networks. They aim to support
the government in engineering public opinion, or in generating *casus
belli* cases to facilitate the legitimization of political arrests. Most
of the members of the Ebabiller Telegram group obscure their real user
information on purpose. They use nicknames and random images that favor
portraits of Erdoğan and Sultan Abdulhamit II as their profile pictures.
Some of the rare real profile photographs have distinctive features such
as Ottomanesque clothing, prop weapons and favor the Turkish fez in
particular.

As a trendsetter, Erdoğan strategically makes use of memetic
engineering: a method of attuning the subjectivity of the masses to
one's interests through the development or repurposing of memes. He
modifies the beliefs and thought patterns of his fans and supporters by
synthesizing and splicing Turkic and Islamic cultural icons. Ottoman,
Selçuklu, and Arabic cultures are appropriated, mixed, and mashed
according to Erdoğan’s idiosyncratic taste to construct a visual common
ground for AKP supporters. This effort deploys the affordances of mixed
media: for example, the national television run by the Turkish state TRT
produces propagandistic television series’ such as Diriliş Ertuğrul
(Resurrection Ertugrul) disguised as entertainment.

Commissioned to familiarize the Turkic iconography to the public
according to Erdoğan’s political agenda, the seal of Kai Tribe
represents two arrows and a bow. It also resembles the Latin letters IYI
which gathered massive hype from the fans of Neo-Ottomania. Flags,
t-shirts, stickers, weapons, armor, and other sorts of merchandise were
produced in massive numbers until another nationalist contender saw the
opportunity to seize the power of this image. The İYİ Party (which
translates as the Good Party in Turkish) strategically took control of
the Kai sign and its legacy., This resulted in Erdoğan shifting his
plans to instead encourage the image to fail. Since the foundation of
the İYİ party, the image is rarely seen on television.

Erdoğan’s speeches also play a key role in propaganda efforts, and the
narrative is constructed through visualization of metaphors and
replication of others' thoughts. These consist of assemblages of
quotations from historical figures or the Quran, serving as a validation
of his intentions, and fortifying his patriotic and conservative image
at the same time. In fact, a poem resulted in Erdoğan’s unjust
imprisonment in the 1990s because it was interpreted as a call for
jihad. Featuring visualization of symbols through the means of language,
the lines that got him prosecuted translate as:

‘Minarets are our bayonets, domes are our helmets

Mosques are our barracks, believers are soldiers’[^21chapter20_6]

After getting out of prison, Erdoğan’s cultivation of a so-called
‘hero's journey’ narrative began. Competing with Kemal Atatürk’s
haunting presence, he seeks to transcend mortality like the founding
president of the country. Aiming to build his image as a standalone
political symbol, Erdoğan’s appearance is carefully designed from tip to
toe to become viralized. For instance, one can detect Erdoğan supporters
from the patterns on their suits. Erdoğan favors prestogal suits in dark
blue, based on a superstition that this lucky suit makes him win
elections.[^21chapter20_7] He has only once changed his style on an Election Day,
and this deviation coincided with his defeat. Thus, variations of this
checkered outfit became popularized. From cabinet members to regular
citizens, his fans and dependents put on the prestogal suit to express
loyalty. Erdoğan’s image appears in the most unexpected places—even
while in traffic. His signature and portrait are amongst the most
popular bumper stickers, alongside Atatürk's. The idea to produce
merchandise as a political means of expression might belong to Atatürk
fans in the first place, but Erdoğan fans have certainly brought it to a
new level with unexpected items such as bed sheets. The appropriation is
not limited to the content but also the form: similarities between the
hand signatures of Tayyip Erdoğan and painter Abidin Dino indicate this.

Another case that exemplifies Erdoğan’s fabricated image is his
presidential campaign's graphic identity. Borrowed from Barack Obama’s,
it could be argued that it goes slightly beyond the blurred line of fair
use. The internet quickly reacted to taunt Erdoğan with doctored images
that feature his photo in a similar style as that which Shepherd Fairey
designed for Obama’s campaign. Instead of captioning the image with a
positive word such as hope, it was titled ‘HOPP’, which in Turkish is a
word used to threaten somebody. Another trick played to ridicule Erdoğan
was through manipulating his logo to look as if it was inspired by the
alcoholic beverage brand Malibu.

Erdoğan puts himself in front of the public as if he embodies an
archetype: the new sultan. As part of his advocacy to preserve Turkic
heritage and traditions, Erdoğan endorses the color turquoise as the
official state color. As a result, there has been a nationwide graphic
makeover, extending even to changing the colors of taxis from yellow to
turquoise, as was introduced in Istanbul.[^21chapter20_8] Retouches include the
uniform colors of the police forces guarding the parliament as well as
the carpets within the halls.[^21chapter20_9] These are instrumentalized signals,
designed to insinuate definitive changes in the establishment.

Erdoğan disapproves of the developments that went into effect during the
modernization process of the country. He seeks to underline the end of
that era by unofficially naming his establishment as ‘the new Turkey’,
which he links to the genealogy of the former sixteen Turkic states. To
emphasize this connection, a ceremony was orchestrated by the
presidential guard regiment for the occasion of President Mahmud Abbas’
diplomatic visit—which coincidentally resembled a scene from Star Wars
referred to as ‘the emperor arrives’. This is the moment in which Sith
Lord Darth Sidious arrives at the Death Star surrounded by his royal
guards: similarly, Erdoğan descends from the principal stairs of his
palace to receive his guest surrounded by guardsmen in warrior
costumes.[^21chapter20_10]

![Fig. 3. Guarded by Pokémon, Erdoğan shakes hands with Professor Oak in Aksaray. Author unknown. Posted on Twitter under the username: Çapul-Şen @kivanceliacik Date: 12.01.2015 Image available at: <https://www.diken.com.tr/erdoganin-askerleri-caps-oldu-yagdi-game-thronestan-age-empiresa-sey-var/>](imgs/20.3.jpg)

<br/>

Because it fell short of the production standards of a space opera, this
villainesque appearance had not gone the way it was expected. Apart from
the overall poor quality of the costumes and props, one of the soldiers
looked more like they were wearing a bathrobe rather than armor. As
images from the ceremony appeared on the media, this design failure
attracted immediate attention from witty users of the internet. The
former dean of the Pamukkale University, Prof. Hasan Herken was the
first to tweet about ‘’the bathrobe incident’’. Numerous satirical
Turkic state names relating to the fictive reign of the bathrobes were
coined in the comments section of his tweet. As this joke became viral,
the image of Erdoğan descending from stairs became an internet meme
template.[^21chapter20_11] These images feature Erdogan alongside various superhero
characters such as Spider-Man, various Pokémon, Batman, Spider-Man, etc.
After this, Prof. Herken had to immediately resign from his position.
According to his statement, this decision was made to not cause any harm
to the institution.[^21chapter20_12]

Superheroes and villains usually have weaknesses following the archetype
of the Achilles heel. Just like how motherly love counters Voldemort,
Superman is weak to kryptonite, Green Lantern to the color yellow,
Wonder Woman to her own magic lasso, and Sauron to the one ring, Erdoğan
is vulnerable to humor and prone to resentment out of his bloated pride.
Time after time such incidents inspire humor: the Gezi Park Protests
(2013), the leaking of corruption audiotapes (2014), the failed coup
attempt (2016), and various other arbitrary government decisions such as
the appointment of Erdoğan’s son-in-law Berat Albayrak to various
ministries. Finally, Albayrak (also known as ‘the groom’ in the Turkish
context) memes circulating over the internet portraying him as an
incompetent dummy minister or a nitwit caused so much humiliation that
it resulted in his resignation. Under heavy fire, Erdoğan could not
insist on keeping the weakest link in his position anymore.[^21chapter20_13]

![Fig. 4. Meme showing Minister Berat Albayrak smiling by the tombstone of Turkish Economy. Author unknown. Posted on Twitter by the username: Dünyalı @obirdunyali Date: 17.08.2020 Image available at: <https://twitter.com/obirdunyali/status/1295298492555042816?s=20>](imgs/20.4.jpg)

<br/>

To keep this fragile political image intact, the primary strategy in
effect is to dominate the traditional channels and moderate social media
to maintain consistency between propaganda narratives. A significant
number of TV channels and newspapers changed owners over the last twenty
years, thus becoming astroturf organizations. It is a common sight to
see newspapers that feature the exact same headline on the same day, as
if they were able to ‘physically retweet’ each other. This of course
suggests that these might be run from the same editorial office. The
current reality in the country is a post-internet version of ‘the boy
who cried wolf’. One cannot take the truthfulness of any news for
granted, even from trusted sources. This environment of uncertainty
creates conditions that are ripe for the trolls to thrive.

But what could be an effective inoculation to enhance our collective
immune system, such that we might retain the coherence between our
realities? The solution may lie in establishing a culture based on the
commons, making use of means that are low cost, accessible, and as easy
as hand gestures to execute. As a mural seen in Jean Luc Godard’s *La
Chinoise* suggests, one must confront vague ideas with clear
images.[^21chapter20_14] Perhaps the potential political usage of internet memes was
foreseen half a century ago by this quote. Especially when imbued with
the power of humor, these images are so relatable that they could
potentially break the echo chambers and instigate the creolization of
world views to facilitate communication in a polarized society. If jokes
could take down ministers, could internet memes serve as silver bullets,
garlic, or a wooden cross to counter the likes of the Ak trolls, and
even to win the final boss battle?

There is no cookie-cutter solution crude as a recipe to follow. Learning
from the adversary and constantly devising new methods is critical to
counter the forces that are dominating the political conversation. A
proven counter-tactic is to follow common sense and not feed trolls by
engaging with them. Mansur Yavaş, the mayor of Ankara deliberately
avoids being too present on social media and even prefers not to be
photographed: a sharp contrast to AKP’s promotional campaigns which are
famous for holding multiple opening ceremonies for already functioning
facilities.

The reason for Yavaş’s success is that he understands the battlefield.
He acknowledges that he does not have the media firepower to match his
rival, and thus avoids polemics at all costs. Against a rival who is
ever-present, always visible and has the loudest voice in the country,
peacefulness and invisibility work as tactics. In an instructive example
of this, Erdoğan’s last personal victory was against Muharrem İnce, a
pompous and loudmouth politician in the presidential elections.
Oblivious to the fact that every polemic provides more ammunition to the
media arsenal under Erdoğan’s disposal, İnce adopted an aggressive
attitude, attempting to overcome Erdoğan by acting like him. But is it
possible to defeat a troll at its own game? Erdoğan unapologetically
makes use of offensive themes under any condition, which no opposing
politician can dare. Could one even defend oneself, let alone attack
back, under such circumstances without risking one’s politically correct
position?

As the case would be in a physical war, one cannot afford to focus
solely on either offense or defense. Defensive measures such as
verification of news, forensic data science, and efforts towards making
basic knowledge of how to survive online more accessible are commendable
efforts but do not suffice. As common sense suggests, the best defense
is a good offense on the battleground of the internet, where not only
ideologies but also alternative realities, true and false, authentic and
fake, clash. Public shaming, defamation, and discrimination help
oppressive forces to change the conversation topic. But these can never
dispel the emancipatory effect of a good joke, slogan, or a clever
hashtag which could be considered as ‘operational coordinates of memetic
warfare.’[^21chapter20_15] While public statements put the public to sleep as they
demand too much attention and time, memes wake people up. They are fun,
understandable but most importantly relatable. What more could a
political party possibly ask for?

To win this war in the long run, there is no weapon other than building
a counter-narrative imbued with the power of humor. Mockery and
humiliation disrupt both amateur and professional trolling efforts. Too
proud to laugh at a good joke along with the crowd, amateurs are easy
targets as taunting them often suffices to cause them to self-destruct
in a resentful tantrum. On the other hand, professional trolls are more
difficult to deal with. They cannot be given a taste of their poison.
Unlike amateurs, they lack emotional surges, ethical concerns, and
attributes that make individuals authentic, vulnerable, and conscious of
the consequences of their actions online. They are never one but many
hiding in plain sight. Even if you spot them, fighting with them online
is akin to engaging in melee combat against zombie armies. You can ban
them *en* *masse*, but they will return regardless as long as they have
internet access, and with more ammunition in the form of hashtags or
memes to unload.

However, the main actors of these battles are not troll armies, states,
or political parties. Civilians are just as effective in digital wars
that fall into the category of fourth-generation warfare. In such
circumstances, war and politics as well as civilian and combatant
identities are intertwined and cannot be separated from one another.
Memetic warfare is no different than how Carl Von Clausewitz saw the
conventional war: the continuation of politics by other means’. These
include unconventional methods that require no institutional protocols,
bureaucracy, or formalities whatsoever. No recruitments need to be made
as the adhocratic nature of this war enables social media users to act
as casual warriors. Consumer electronics, internet connection, and basic
image editing software suffice to participate in politics as subjects or
combatants with the potential to turn the tide of war. These digital
affordances might serve as weapons, but they are merely props that do
not fire without ammunition: a common sense of humor.

Following Clausewitz's thought, Metahaven describes jokes as ‘a
continuation of politics by other memes.’[^21chapter20_16] for a reason. As memes
have ambiguous ontological natures, there are various unpredictable
factors relating to critical potency, timeliness, and aesthetics,
alongside others, which makes a meme an actual meme; of these, satire
might be the most definitive. Even good jokes do not guarantee political
impact alone, as honorable public service does not guarantee the winning
of elections. As anonymously asserted by the internet, a meme is not a
meme until it is fully absorbed by its public. However, in war the
situation is somewhat different. Spending hours to develop good jokes or
humorous political memes to address people who already agree with us is
self-propaganda at its best. But in war, a meme only becomes a meme when
it hits the mind of people that disagree.

## References

140Journos. “Devletin Yeni Rengi: Turkuaz.” *140Journos*, January 20,
2017. <a href="https://140journos.com/devletin-yeni-rengi-turkuaz-18d377f88407">https://140journos.com/devletin-yeni-rengi-turkuaz-18d377f88407</a>.

Alemdaroğlu, Ayça and Tol, Gönül. “Turkey’s Generation Z Turns Against
Erdogan,” *Foreign Policy*, July 15, 2020,
<a href="https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/07/15/turkey-youth-education-erdogan/">https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/07/15/turkey-youth-education-erdogan/</a> .

Diken*.* “Erdoğan’ın Askerleri ‘Infial yarattı’; ve o ‘Resmin Orijinali’
de Bulundu.” *Diken.* January 12, 2015.
<a href="http://www.diken.com.tr/erdoganin-askerleri-caps-oldu-yagdi-game-thronestan-age-empiresa-sey-var/?fbclid=IwAR1ipLvL4rXZbwCDCjOB49QpGbzZR4cdUQ4DYFx%5C_jYHZceuTS7MDe">http://www.diken.com.tr/erdoganin-askerleri-caps-oldu-yagdi-game-thronestan-age-empiresa-sey-var/?fbclid=IwAR1ipLvL4rXZbwCDCjOB49QpGbzZR4cdUQ4DYFx\_jYHZceuTS7MDe</a>.

Gall, Carlotta. ‘Turkey’s Finance Minister Resigns Amid Pressures of
Sliding Economy’, *New York Times*, 8 November 2020.
<a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/08/business/turkey-finance-minister-resigns.html">https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/08/business/turkey-finance-minister-resigns.html</a>.

Giesea, Jeff. “It’s Time to Embrace the Memetic Warfare.” *Open
Publications* 5 (Spring, 2017): 9.
<a href="https://www.act.nato.int/images/stories/media/doclibrary/open201705-memetic1.pdf">https://www.act.nato.int/images/stories/media/doclibrary/open201705-memetic1.pdf</a>

Hürriyet. “İşte İstanbul'un yeni Taksileri! Turkuaz, Siyah….”
*Hürriyet*, July 19, 2018.
<a href="https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/iste-istanbulun-yeni-taksileri-turkuaz-siyah-40902239">https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/iste-istanbulun-yeni-taksileri-turkuaz-siyah-40902239</a>

Hürriyet Daily News “Erdoğan 'Makes His Own Fashion,’ Turkey’s
Semi-Official Agency Says.” *Hürriyet Daily News*, January 12, 2015.
<a href="https://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/erdogan-makes-his-own-fashion-turkeys-semi-official-agency-says-76826">https://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/erdogan-makes-his-own-fashion-turkeys-semi-official-agency-says-76826</a>.

Hürriyet Daily News. “Turkish Professor resigns over joke about
Erdoğan’s 16 warriors’, *Hürriyet Daily News*, January 20, 2015.
<a href="https://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkish-professor-resigns-over-joke-about-erdogans-16-warriors-77166">https://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkish-professor-resigns-over-joke-about-erdogans-16-warriors-77166</a>.

Metahaven. *Can Jokes Bring Down Governments? Memes, Design and
Politics.* Moscow: Strelka Press, 2013.

Oda TV. “TÜGVA’nın Arkasında Sümeyye Erdoğan mı Var.” *Oda TV.* May 12,
2015.
<a href="https://odatv4.com/o-vakfin-arkasinda-sumeyye-erdogan-mi-var-1205151200.html">https://odatv4.com/o-vakfin-arkasinda-sumeyye-erdogan-mi-var-1205151200.html</a>

Partisi, Cumhuriyet Halk. “Troll Özel Sayısı.” *Millet Dergisi*, June 6,
2020. <a href="https://milletdergisi.chp.org.tr/Detay.aspx?id=2031">https://milletdergisi.chp.org.tr/Detay.aspx?id=2031</a>.

Wikipedia Contributors. “Opinion Polling for the 2021 Turkish General
Election.” Last accessed April 29, 2021.
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion%5C_polling%5C_for%5C_the%5C_2023%5C_Turkish%5C_general%5C_election">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion\_polling\_for\_the\_2023\_Turkish\_general\_election</a>

Wikipedia Contributors. “Opinion Polling for the 2021 Turkish General
Election.” Last accessed April 29, 2021.
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion%5C_polling%5C_for%5C_the%5C_2023%5C_Turkish%5C_general%5C_election">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion\_polling\_for\_the\_2023\_Turkish\_general\_election</a>

Williams, Stuart. “Dress-up warriors no joke for Erdogan” *Times of
Israel*, January 22, 2015.
<a href="https://www.timesofisrael.com/dress-up-warriors-no-joke-for-erdogan/">https://www.timesofisrael.com/dress-up-warriors-no-joke-for-erdogan/</a>.

Ziya, Eşref. “Asker Duası (Minareler Süngü Kubbeler Miğfer) (English
translation).” Submitted by Artukî, July 25, 2019.
<a href="https://lyricstranslate.com/en/asker-duas%C4%B1-minareler-s%C3%BCng%C3%BC-kubbeler-mi%C4%9Ffer-soldiers-pray.html">https://lyricstranslate.com/en/asker-duası-minareler-süngü-kubbeler-miğfer-soldiers-pray.html</a>.

[^21chapter20_1]: Wikipedia Contributors, “Opinion Polling for the 2021 Turkish
    General Election,” last accessed April 29, 2021,
    <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion%5C_polling%5C_for%5C_the%5C_2023%5C_Turkish%5C_general%5C_election">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion\_polling\_for\_the\_2023\_Turkish\_general\_election</a>

[^21chapter20_2]: Gönül Tol, Ayça Alemdaroğlu, ‘‘Turkey’s Generation Z Turns Against
    Erdogan’,’ *Foreign Policy*, July 15, 2020,
    <https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/07/15/turkey-youth-education-erdogan/>

[^21chapter20_3]: Wikipedia Contributors, “Ak Trolls,” last accessed March 15 2021,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AK_Trolls>

[^21chapter20_4]: ‘‘TÜGVA’nın Arkasında Sümeyye Erdoğan Mı Var,” *Oda tv*, May 12,
    2015,
    <a href="https://odatv4.com/o-vakfin-arkasinda-sumeyye-erdogan-mi-var-1205151200.html">https://odatv4.com/o-vakfin-arkasinda-sumeyye-erdogan-mi-var-1205151200.html</a>.

[^21chapter20_5]: Cumhuriyet Halk Partisi, ‘‘Troll Özel Sayısı,” *Millet Dergisi*,
    June 6, 2020, <a href="https://milletdergisi.chp.org.tr/Detay.aspx?id=2031">https://milletdergisi.chp.org.tr/Detay.aspx?id=2031</a>.

[^21chapter20_6]: ‘Eşref Ziya, “Asker Duası (Minareler Süngü Kubbeler Miğfer)
    (English translation),” Submitted by Artukî, July 25, 2019.
    <a href="https://lyricstranslate.com/en/asker-duas%C4%B1-minareler-s%C3%BCng%C3%BC-kubbeler-mi%C4%9Ffer-soldiers-pray.html">https://lyricstranslate.com/en/asker-duası-minareler-süngü-kubbeler-miğfer-soldiers-pray.html</a>

[^21chapter20_7]: “‘Erdoğan 'Makes his Own Fashion,’ Turkey’s Semi-Official Agency
    Says,” *Hürriyet Daily News*, January 12, 2015,
    <a href="https://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/erdogan-makes-his-own-fashion-turkeys-semi-official-agency-says-76826">https://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/erdogan-makes-his-own-fashion-turkeys-semi-official-agency-says-76826</a>

[^21chapter20_8]: “İşte İstanbul'un Yeni Taksileri! Turkuaz, Siyah…,” *Hürriyet*,
    July 19, 2018,
    <a href="https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/iste-istanbulun-yeni-taksileri-turkuaz-siyah-40902239">https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/gundem/iste-istanbulun-yeni-taksileri-turkuaz-siyah-40902239</a>

[^21chapter20_9]: “Devletin Yeni Rengi: Turkuaz,” *140Journos*, January 20, 2017,
    <https://140journos.com/devletin-yeni-rengi-turkuaz-18d377f88407>

[^21chapter20_10]: Stuart Williams, “Dress-up Warriors no Joke for Erdogan,” *Times
    of Israel*, January 22, 2015.
    <a href="https://www.timesofisrael.com/dress-up-warriors-no-joke-for-erdogan/">https://www.timesofisrael.com/dress-up-warriors-no-joke-for-erdogan/</a>

[^21chapter20_11]: “Erdoğan’ın Askerleri ‘Infial Yarattı’; ve o ‘Resmin Orijinali’
    de Bulundu,” *Diken*, January 12, 2015,
    <http://www.diken.com.tr/erdoganin-askerleri-caps-oldu-yagdi-game-thronestan-age-empiresa-sey-var/?fbclid=IwAR1ipLvL4rXZbwCDCjOB49QpGbzZR4cdUQ4DYFx_jYHZceuTS7MDese3rTI>

[^21chapter20_12]: “Turkish Professor Resigns Over Joke About Erdoğan’s 16
    Warriors,” *Hürriyet Daily News*, January 20, 2015,
    <https://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkish-professor-resigns-over-joke-about-erdogans-16-warriors-77166>

[^21chapter20_13]: Carlotta Gall, “Turkey’s Finance Minister Resigns Amid Pressures
    of Sliding Economy,” *New York Times*, November 8, 2020,
    <https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/08/business/turkey-finance-minister-resigns.html>

[^21chapter20_14]: Original quote in French: “Il faut confronter les idées vagues
    avec des images claires.”

[^21chapter20_15]: Jeff Giesea, “It’s Time to Embrace the Memetic Warfare,” Open
    Publications 5 (Spring, 2017): 9,
    <a href="https://www.act.nato.int/images/stories/media/doclibrary/open201705-memetic1.pdf">https://www.act.nato.int/images/stories/media/doclibrary/open201705-memetic1.pdf</a>

[^21chapter20_16]: Metahaven, *Can Jokes Bring Down Governments? Memes, Design and
    Politics.* Moscow: Strelka Press, 2013.
