---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Weapons of Mass Distraction: Far-Right Culture-Jamming Tactics in Memetic Warfare

###Andy King

## Memefluencers

When it comes to the creation and dissemination of weaponized memes, the
alt-right remains one step ahead. The ‘Great Meme Wars of 2016’ might be
old news to the veterans that waged them, but have only recently been
scrutinized by journalists and politicians, tripping over the already
outdated lingo. Progressives have sheepishly acknowledged the political
power of memes but still fail to accommodate their production
mechanisms and develop countermeasures. Leftist memes are still
primarily created *by* leftists *for* leftists, without a methodical
branching out to adversaries. The alt-right excels at conquering new
territories by invading not only politically neutral online spaces, but
also those belonging to their opponents.

As a far-right political movement, they were able to manufacture what
appeared to be a new identity—complete with its own jargon and visual
culture—while retaining archaic beliefs. Apart from its surface
rebranding, the only ‘alternative’ aspect of the alt-right is the
average age of its members and technological prowess. In its heart, it
never stopped pandering to mainstream racist, homophobic, and sexist
sentiments. Despite this, the alt-right managed to capture the attention
of younger generations with dank memes, controversy and networked
adventure, filling the void left by multiple financial crises and social
disintegration. The left, on the other hand, was placed in the position
of an out-of-touch academic defender—rather than influencer—fighting to
protect remaining online territories, instead of seizing and subverting
new grounds.

![Fig. 1: Right-wing meme stereotyping leftists as digitally illiterate and therefore irrelevant SJWs. <https://imgflip.com/i/1zwubx>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.1.jpeg) 

</br>

This is not to say that tech-savvy leftists haven’t been trying to
discredit the internet maxim ‘*The left can’t meme’* \[Fig. 1.\]. There
has been a recent surge of artists including Joshua Citarella, Brad
Troemel, and clusterduck collective, as well as YouTubers such as
ContraPoints, hbomberguy, PhilosophyTube—who have managed to capture the
imaginations of young, left-leaning netizens. They co-opted the ironic
and populist style used by the alt-right to appeal to disenfranchised
millennials, using it to raise class consciousness, spread awareness of
the climate crisis, and support trans rights while retaining a
rebellious, anti-establishment tone. Fans of controversial leftist
podcasters such as Chapo Trap House, Cum Town, and Red Scare happily
appropriate Pepe and Wojak memes to suit their political needs. Using a
frank and vulgar sense of humor, they aim to prove the left can be as
subversive and rebellious as the alt-right. This is important because
the left currently finds itself in the contradictory position of being
referred to as ‘the establishment’ while not having the powers that come
with actually being one.

Conversely the alt-right, with their cash-pumped think tanks and
political connections, have nevertheless molded their image into that of
an underdog: a convenient ploy to justify aggressive tactics such as
spamming pro-choice Facebook groups with images of aborted fetuses,
raiding subreddits, and shitposting cringe compilations of angry
feminists and liberals appearing to ‘cancel free speech’. Their outreach
has been far and wide—no corner of the internet was spared. Leftists’
understandably angry reactions to racist memes and hateful speech were
documented and fed back into the online propaganda machine portraying
them as humorless snowflakes.

## Open Book for Those Who Dare Look

Alt-right instructional guides and manifestos for online warfare have
remained accessible and easy to share. Once uploaded to a pastebin, they
are continuously updated, copied and pasted. This is why they are
referred to as ‘copypastas’: anyone can modify and repost them. As is
the case with memes, maximum efficiency trumps attribution rights: the
original author is rendered insignificant. They are written in an
engagingly hyperbolic manner, containing clear instructions for
immediate action which are continuously updated. \[Fig. 2.\] A
call-to-action copypasta is typically written in a buoyant military
tone, beginning with a gallant battle speech followed by a ‘best of’
selection of far-right articles, a curated collection of meme templates
and YouTube compilations of ‘liberals being rekt’. Copypastas run by
krautpol

[^20chapter19_1] even come with their own FashWave playlist to energize recruits
during their missions. Despite the horrific content, the tone remains
overwhelmingly positive and incentivizing. It ends with a to-do list
consisting of specific tasks divided into ‘strategic echelons’. The
reader can join a relevant battalion, depending on their level of
bravery and skill set. These range from ‘top tier’ battalions for
activists willing to publicly expose their faces in real-life
Identitarian rallies to ‘lower tier’ (but more popular) battalions
consisting of anonymous activists ready to spam, dox, and harass.

![Fig. 2: Example of a krautpol copypasta. Note the upbeat military
tone and the reminder for members to be proactive without in-fighting.
Copypastas such as this one help far-right factions overlook their
ideological differences and work together to complete specific tasks.
<https://pastebin.com/zRU2HecC>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.2.jpeg)

<br/>

Another reason the alt-right is able to amass large troll armies is due
to its ability to embrace ideological differences within its own
factions. Infighting is seen as unproductive and is strongly
discouraged. Therefore, it is not unusual to witness atheists, hardcore
Christians, gay white supremacists, and homophobes fighting side-by-side
during an online crusade. In a faux display of goodwill, far-right
members can even jump in to protect their political opponents if they
find themselves scrutinized for a politically incorrect tweet or a
comment taken out of context. Combined with widely circulated stories of
leftist cancel culture, this open-arm embrace is very compelling to
potential recruits who are desperate to belong. Yet is a false image.
The alt-right does not offer economic alternatives or psychological
support even to its most ardent members. Their ‘act first, think later’
campaigns are adept at fueling proactive urgency, but are built on
nothing more than negative emotion. Economic policy always boils down to
the naive belief that once all immigrants are expelled and women are
stripped of their rights, the economic and psychological ills of
capitalism will simply evaporate. Their willingness to embrace is
opportunistic, lacking a heartfelt concern for the well-being of their
recruits.

## All Your Base are Belong to Us

It’s sometimes hard to believe that only a decade ago, disruptive online
interventions, hacktivist raids, and the marriage of truth to irony were
tools that once belonged to left-leaning anarchists working under the
name *Anonymous.* After key members were imprisoned by government
intelligence agencies, the alt-right were quick to take over 4chan
threads and co-opt youthful hunger for online anti-establishment
politics. They also cultivated their hacktivist tools, namely Anonymous’
ability to recruit massive online armies in a decentralized manner. One
of the assimilated weapons was culture jamming, which included
disruptive campaigns such as trespassing into enemy grounds and
converting mainstream culture into a Trojan horse for radical thought.
Prominent neo-Nazi Andrew Anglin outlined the importance of culture
jamming in the *Daily Stormer Style Guide*:

> Always hijack existing cultural memes in any way possible. Don’t worry
> if the meme was originally Jewish. It doesn’t matter. \[...\] Packing
> our message inside of existing cultural memes and humor can be viewed
> as a delivery method. Something like adding cherry flavor to
> children’s medicine. \[...\] We want to take over the culture, to
> consume it.[^20chapter19_2]

Politically neutral memes were appropriated and subverted. SS armbands
were photoshopped onto the arms of dainty Anime girls. Speech bubbles in
popular internet comics were blanked out and rewritten. Scientific
infographics were edited to authenticate racist and sexist stereotypes.
Fake avatars, accounts, and profiles were created to impersonate and
caricature their adversaries. Under this guise, far-right users raided
neighboring forums and threads. Like countless others, Fredrick
Brennan—who later went on to create 8chan—was first exposed to 4chan
trolls on an imageboard for *Sonic the Hedgehog* fans during a raid.
Fascinated, he followed the trolls back to their mothership, where he
stayed for over a decade. After 8chan was linked to multiple domestic
terror attacks—and was overtaken by shadowy billionaires—Fredrick is now
working hard to remove the imageboard site from the internet.[^20chapter19_3]

Far-right trolls capture the attention of potential recruits by
hijacking their visual culture and posting inflammatory content on their
platforms—a kind of digital graffiti. Because they hide behind avatars
typical for the targeted community while baiting members into throwing
tantrums, it’s difficult to differentiate between an actual member
acting out in response to a troll and a troll acting out as a member. As
mods struggle to control a raid, they initiate platform-wide account
purges in which innocent members get thrown out together with the
guilty. This, in turn, breeds further anger and mistrust in the
community and its leaders. Meanwhile, curious members are lured out of
their platforms and given the opportunity to join future raids. After
Gamergate—the largest cross-platform assimilation—far-right trolls began
to run out of internet subcultures to infiltrate. They felt ready to
take on ‘The Media’.

## Accidental Victory

Once upon a time, Pepe was a generic reaction meme used across the
political spectrum, not dissimilar to how Facebook stickers are used to
display a variety of emotions. Its adoption by the alt-right was
circumstantial. The real danger to Pepe’s demise was always the
potential appropriation by the ‘lamestream media’. When celebrities and
boomers share a certain meme, they effectively write its eulogy. Much to
the chagrin of professional netizens, this was beginning to happen to
Pepe. Far-right users restored Pepe’s fading edginess by creating
increasingly controversial renditions to separate themselves from the
much-hated normies. When Pepe was flagged by the Anti-Defamation League
as a hate-symbol, the move was met with celebration and hilarity across
the far-right: Pepe’s cancellation was his resurrection \[Fig. 3.\]. The
alt-right had won a culture war they weren’t even waging by gaining a
mascot they didn’t even invent. Best of all, political opponents who
weren’t aware of Pepe’s new status as a hate symbol, or refused to give
him up, were suddenly attacked for being closeted fascists.

![Fig. 3.1: Matt Furie—Pepe’s creator—officially killed off his creation
in 2017. Far-right usersresponded by resurrecting him. (i)
<https://me.me/i/00-pepe-has-been-resurrected-praise-kek-shadilay-13576027> \(ii) <https://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/257302630/%5C#q257304889">](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.3.1.jpeg)

<br/>

![Fig. 3.2: Matt Furie—Pepe’s creator—officially killed off his creation
in 2017. Far-right usersresponded by resurrecting him. (ii) <https://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/257302630/%5C#q257304889">](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.3.2.jpeg)

<br/>

A movement born on the internet needs real life legitimacy if it aspires
to influence the world at large. Since trust is difficult to
manufacture, it can be scavenged from those who have more of it. For the
alt-right to succeed, the public had to lose trust in the movement’s
critics: the mainstream media. Even though many fascists were indeed
using Pepe, many were not. The far-right caricatured journalists as
being out of touch with youth culture and blamed the mainstream media
for being paranoid and spreading fake news. Journalists retaliated by
defending their rationale while Twitter mobs argued over whether the
continued use of Pepe memes in politically neutral contexts was morally
condemnable. It was the dawn of fake new allegations.

## Operation O-KKK 

In 2017, alt-right activists decided to exploit the media’s lack of
internet know-how by laying out traps. If Pepe—a goofy everyman created
by a hippie cartoonist could be branded as a fascist symbol—what about
something even more innocuous and arbitrary?

Before long, Operation O-KKK was launched \[Fig. 4.\]. Its mission was
to trick the media into believing that the OK hand gesture was a dog
whistle for fascism. The rationale was invented on the spot: three
outstretched fingers designated the letter ‘w’ while the index finger
forming a loop with the thumb represented ‘p’. Together, they spelled
out **w**hite **p**ower. Activists were instructed to create fake
feminist, POC and leftist twitter accounts, and then tweet their disgust
at this new symbol for white power. At the same time, openly fascist
alt-accounts were used to spam twitter with offensive content
accompanied by the OK Hand emoji👌 in order to validate accusations.

![Fig. 4: One of many OPERATION O-KKK threads on 4chan. Image: <ahttps://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/209521954/%5C#q209527911>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.4.jpeg)

<br/>

Far-right users masquerading as feminists began to wage a pretend war
with far-right users masquerading as caricatured versions of themselves
\[Fig. 5.\]. Soon enough, actual feminists caught wind and joined in to
defend the faux feminists. The media picked up the story and was
immediately ridiculed. Meanwhile, the alt-right celebrated their
newfound power to control the media narrative.

When right-wing trolls LARP as ‘literal nazis’, the borders between
irony and sincerity quickly dissolve. It was a matter of time before
‘literal nazis’ began to *unironically* use the OK Hand sign. When
called out, they pretended to be conservative trolls. Brenton Tarrant—a
domestic terrorist who murdered 51 people—spent 14 years frequenting
4chan and 8chan boards, the source of PsyOps such as Operation O-KKK.
During his livestream of the Christchurch mosque shootings, he
demonstrated a masterful knowledge of ironic, far-right memetic lore. In
his manifesto, he wrote that he isn’t against foreigners living abroad
and wished ‘different peoples of their world all the best regardless of
their ethnicity, race, culture or faith’.[^20chapter19_4] Justin Trudeau and Candace
Owens—a black conservative—were sardonically credited as influences.
After his arrest, Tarrant flashed the OK hand sign in court.[^20chapter19_5]

![Fig. 5: Feminists United is a Twitter account led by a 4chan troll. Tweet: <https://twitter.com/proudfemme83/status/836366339514241024>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.5.jpeg)

<br/>

Ironic far-right charades benefit everyone whose ideologies lie beyond
the centre-right. It’s advantageous for Conservatives if the Overton
window shifts to the right because their opposition to refugees pales in
comparison to calls for a white ethnostate. At the same time, neo-Nazis
can hide behind the curtain of irony. Robert Evans, a journalist for
bellingcat, was publicly listed as a target for assassination after he
reported on Brenton Tarrant and 8chan. One 8chan poster promised to pay
15 bitcoins (worth \$60,000 at the time) for his death. When Evans
posted a screenshot of the bounty on his Twitter account, 8channers
alleged the bounty was fake and mocked him for not getting ‘the
joke’.[^20chapter19_6]

## Operation Honk

Around the same time, a Pepe variant had begun gaining traction. Donning
a rainbow colored wig and red nose, he symbolized a world gone mad. This
new clownified offshoot was called Honkler \[Fig. 6.\]. According to the
disseminators of Honkler memes, liberals had taken over the media, and
anyone caught disagreeing with the ‘liberal agenda’ ran the risk of
being cancelled. In this mad world, everything had been turned upside
down; degeneration was dressed up as progressivism. The only way to
combat progressive elites was to dress up as a clown in order to avoid
scrutiny, for only the fool can laugh at kings.

Honkler came with its own pill-philosophy: the Honkpill. According to a
4chan post, it is best described as the Blackpill on nitrous oxide.
Advertised as a coping strategy for feelings of anomie, the Honkpill
evangelized laughing at the absurdity of the world instead of living in
a state of depressed apathy. A Honkpill copypasta explains: ‘Taking the
Honkpill is a declaration of freedom and an act of philosophical
transcendence; it is the simultaneous acknowledgment of the Blackpill
with the decision to avoid its attendant nihilism – by consciously
choosing to seek joy, to seek adventure, to seek light-hearted and
self-amused mastery in the midst of all the chaos.’

However, much like everything else on 4chan, its purported nihilism was
tongue-in-cheek. There was a method behind Honkler’s madness, and it
culminated in a series of PsyOps – some of which still continue today.
One such PsyOp was called ‘Operation Honk’. Since posting Pepe memes on
social media resulted in bans, a stand-in had to be used. The emojis 🤡🌏
became a cross-platform dog whistle for Honkler and, more generally, a
‘degenerate’ clown world ruined by liberals. The supposedly ‘nihilistic’
message behind Honkpill was boastful rather than pessimistic: if the
media is a circus, then 4chan is the ringmaster. A 4chan user explains
Operation Honk: ‘we created the clown meme to give the fake media a
face. the \[sic\] media reports lunacy and not the objective fact. the
fact that they will report on this clown meme proves this point and will
redpill the masses as the fact that they are reading about a cartoon
frog clown sinks in.’

![Fig. 6: *Honkler* holding Brenton Tarrant’s inscribed gun. In one of
his manifestos, Brentan Tarrant wrote ‘Clown memes are step one of
riding the tiger where we have to go a little coocoo and rebuild
ourselves.’[^20chapter19_7] He also advocated supporters to: ‘Create memes, post
memes, and spread memes. Memes have done more for the ethno-nationalist
movement than any manifesto.[^20chapter19_8] Image: <https://boards.4chan.org/pol/">](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.6.jpeg)

<br/>

Once again, the media took the bait. Articles such as ‘White
Nationalists Adopt Clowns as Their Next Racist Symbol’[^20chapter19_9] and ‘No Joke:
White Nationalists are now Using Clowns to Spread Hatred’[^20chapter19_10] brought
more attention to the movement. After ‘tricking’ the media into
believing that a frog, the OK hand gesture, and clowns were symbols of
white supremacy, channers decided to see how deep the rabbit hole could
go. Hijacking the LGBT flag—the ultimate symbol of progressive
politics—was going to be their crown jewel.

## Taking Back the Rainbow: A Place for Every Race

Operation \#takingbacktherainbow went like this: If the rainbow flag
emoji 🏳️‍🌈 is used concurrently with hate speech, it will be flagged as
the latest fascist symbol. The PsyOp was advertised as a win-win: If the
rainbow flag gets cancelled for being a dog whistle for fascism,
LGBTQIA+ communities will be silenced on social media. If the rainbow
flag doesn’t get cancelled, then the far-right will have co-opted their
opponent’s symbol and defaced it \[Fig. 7.\]. Channers were hoping that
algorithms designed to automatically remove hate-speech would pick up on
this artificially manufactured connection. Fortunately, despite their
best efforts, this has not happened yet.

![Fig. 7: 4chan thread laying out Operation \#takingbacktherainbow. Image: <https://boards.4chan.org/pol/>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.7.jpeg)

<br/>

\#takingbacktherainbow memes were (poorly) disguised as being pro-LGBT+,
advocating ‘preserving diversity’ through racial segregation. Some
far-right memes were accidentally shared by progressives too distracted
by the rainbow optics to notice the supremacist tagline: ‘a place for
every race’ \[Fig. 8.\]. Far-right users who were hungry for real-life
mayhem developed a piggyback strategy: bringing physical rainbow flags
to rallies. The goal was two-fold. First, the LGBT Pride flag could be
used to deflect accusations of bigotry. Under its ‘protection’,
far-right protesters could provoke foes such as Antifa into a fight in
order to label them as ‘homophobic’. The second goal was more insidious:
showing up to demonstrations with rainbow swastikas photoshopped onto
Confederate flags would give the impression that the far-right was in
allegiance with the LGBT+ community. This would allow the alt-right to
feign open-mindedness to potential converts, while simultaneously
tricking opponents into unfairly condemning LGBT+ communities for
inciting hate.

![Fig. 8.1 Collection of Honkler and \#takingbacktherainbow memes.Images: <https://boards.4chan.org/pol/> and <https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/clown-pepe-honk-honk-clown-world/photos/>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.8.1.jpeg)

<br/>

![Fig. 8.1 Collection of Honkler and \#takingbacktherainbow memes.Images: <https://boards.4chan.org/pol/> and <https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/clown-pepe-honk-honk-clown-world/photos/>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.8.2.jpeg)

<br/>

![Fig. 8.1 Collection of Honkler and \#takingbacktherainbow memes.Images: <https://boards.4chan.org/pol/> and <https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/clown-pepe-honk-honk-clown-world/photos/>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.8.3.jpeg)

<br/>

![Fig. 8.1 Collection of Honkler and \#takingbacktherainbow memes.Images: <https://boards.4chan.org/pol/> and <https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/clown-pepe-honk-honk-clown-world/photos/>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.8.4.jpeg)

<br/>

## How to Kill a Clown

Clown world memes reached their peak popularity in anticipation of the
2019 *Joker* film release. This was not circumstantial: Joker meme
formats were in use before the alt-right decided to hijack clowns, and
there were parallels between the Honkpill and the Joker’s philosophy of
manic contempt. The 2019 *Joker* film offered a relatable origin story
in which the protagonist—who ends up becoming the Joker—is unemployed,
single, and still lives with his mother. After underfunded social
services forcibly cut off his medication supply, he spirals into madness
and unintentionally triggers an uprising against the wealthy elites.

Incels were excited to see a film depicting a lonely man going on a
killing spree. They memed extensively about their identification with
Joker, calling for a ‘beta uprising’. Far-right trolls hoped the media
would notice the parallels between clowns, incels, and fascism, and the
film would get cancelled or become restricted. The more people believed
the 2019 *Joker* film posed a domestic terrorist threat, the more
precautionary measures would be taken to secure cinemas. Their ultimate
goal was to engineer a self-fulfilling prophecy by provoking audiences
enough to launch an emotional avalanche culminating in a terror attack.
For a period of time, the plan seemed to be working: the media began to
criticize the film before it was even released.

The director, Todd Phillips, was berated for creating a protagonist
sympathetic to incels. Movie critics continuously pointed out the
problematic and irresponsible aspects of the film. *Salon* described
*Joker* as a ‘dangerous manifesto that could inspire incels to commit
acts of violence’.[^20chapter19_11] *Indiewire* agreed, labelling it as ‘a toxic
rallying cry for self-pitying incels’.[^20chapter19_12] Social media was split into
two camps: those agreeing the film was a threat to democracy, and those
belittling ‘woke culture’, and denouncing journalists and critics as
being disingenuous and cowardly. The US Army issued a warning to service
members about a ‘credible potential mass shooting’, explaining why
incels idolise Joker, and listing instructions for a mass shooter
scenario.[^20chapter19_13] Twitter users promised to boycott the film. The actor
playing the lead role —Joaquin Phoenix—stormed out of an interview in
response to a question asking if his character might inspire mass
shooters. The NYPD promised to supply uniformed officers during
screenings. Cinemas banned toy guns, costumes and masks.[^20chapter19_14] The film
still hadn’t been released yet.

The alt-right felt victorious, sprinkling mayhem on social media
platforms by sardonically suggesting cancelling all white men and
advocating ‘penis inspections’ before movie screenings. The antics of
one 4chan troll, self-identified as Payne, went viral. He hung signs in
cinemas proclaiming that single men were banned from attending Joker
screenings. The signs were photographed and posted online, adding fuel
to the fire. Because so many people believed the signs were real, AMC
had to step in and assert that no such policies had actually been
implemented. Moral outrage and anger was in full swing, and far-right
trolls couldn’t wait to see what would happen when the film was publicly
released.

Then, disaster struck: normies loved the film. Slavoj Žižek—a Marxist
philosopher—congratulated Hollywood for producing an anti-capitalist
blockbuster.[^20chapter19_15] Instead of inciting incels to commit violence, *Joker*
captured a zeitgeist. The film’s immediate acclaim exposed the
commonality of anti-establishment sentiment across the political
spectrum, irrespective of gender, race, or class. The film’s bleak
portrayal of late-stage capitalism and crumbling social security nets
resonated with many of its viewers. Clown memes became mainstream. The
clown emoji began to be used extensively to convey the feeling of being
shortchanged, drowning its secondary meaning. The far-right couldn’t get
their last laugh in a world overrun with clowns.

![Fig. 9: *Putting on Clown Makeup* meme template was popularized in
2019. It depicts an individual suffering cognitive dissonance from
contradicting observations of the world. He reconciles the contradiction
in a nonsensical way, thereby making a fool of himself*.*[^20chapter19_16] Image:
<https://knowyourmeme.com/photos/1563390-putting-on-clown-makeup>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.9.jpeg)

<br/>

![Fig. 10.1: Joker memes created and spread outside far-right circles. ‘We Live in a Society’ became one of the most popular Joker memes, yielding endless variants.
<https://me.me/i/creating-joker-1989-throw-him-into-chemical-waster-creating-joker-866cd2582a7042679e82fd818478d36e>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.10.1.jpeg)

<br/>

![Fig. 10.1: Joker memes created and spread outside far-right circles. Left-wing meme depicting Karl Marx as Joker.](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.10.2.jpeg)

<br/>

When right-wing extremists began to exit the screen in 2016, their
threat to democracy became apparent IRL. People who previously brushed
off incels as petty virgins and the alt-right as a niche collection of
misfits were suddenly unscrambling boogaloo memes and learning the
differences between Chads and Stacies. However, their efforts stopped
there. No major online counter-strategies were undertaken and, all the
while, class inequality continues to grow. Then, in January 2021,
far-right mobs stormed the US Capitol. Since there was no time left to
develop deradicalisation think tanks, drastic solutions had to be
implemented. Twitter accounts, Facebook groups and subreddits were
banned en masse. Parler, a ‘free speech’ social network used by
right-wing radicals and conspiracy theorists, was shut down by Google,
Apple, and Amazon.

There is no doubt that deplatforming is an efficient strategy; when
executed on a wide scale it can throw an entire movement into disarray.
Nationalist rhetoric has lulled as right-wingers mourn election losses.
But this is only temporary. The practice of deplatforming opposes the
inherent structure of the internet. The long-standing failure to
undermine online piracy is proof of this. Banning The Pirate Bay yielded
thousands of mirrors with VPNs mushrooming overnight. It’s only a matter
of time before alt-tech social media platforms grow in scope, this time
out of plain sight. Fascist shibboleths will become subtler so as to
evade auto-bans; the conversion tactics will become more nuanced.

## Countering the Counterstrategies

The alt-right have persistently proven their ability to adapt to
situations geared against them. By masterfully manipulating the
narrative to appear in control, they transformed the act of getting
banned from an inconvenience into a goal: *we didn’t get banned, we got
ourselves banned on purpose to prove how arbitrary free speech policies
are*. When Blizzard forbade the use of OK hand emojis in a multiplayer
game,[^20chapter19_17] it inadvertently confirmed the alt-right’s power to decide
what is a fascist symbol and what is not. When far-right trolls spam
enemy communities with far-right symbols and memes, those communities
get flagged and removed. Proving the original members weren’t fascist is
difficult if the community is small. Stricter regulation is leading to
the emergence of a parallel internet composed of alternative social
media platforms—such as Gab and Bitchute—toxic echo chambers and melting
pots for far-right ideologies and conspiracy theories. While this feels
like a breath of fresh air for Twitter users and Redditors who are sick
of being harassed by malicious edge-lords, research shows that publicly
engaging with far-right extremists on a Twitter comment thread
deradicalizes that thread.[^20chapter19_18] In recent years, there has been an
uptick of studies proposing direct intervention as a viable
countermeasure to hate speech, referred to as ‘building a
counter-narrative’. Unfortunately, many progressives often end up
debating trolls or bot accounts, overlooking legitimate posters who
might be more open to changing their minds. Misplaced debates can be
avoided by checking a user’s post history to see if the account is
genuine. A quick analysis of a user’s profile and post history should be
done even when a user is presenting as left-wing: as mentioned
previously, far-right trolls pose as feminists and POC in order to
misdirect and flame in-fighting. It’s also important to engage with the
goal to de-escalate the conversation, even when it’s tempting to do
otherwise. According to the Anti-Defamation League, this can be done
through fact-checking, humour and satire.[^20chapter19_19]

PsyOps such as Operation O-KKK, Operation Honk and \#reclaimtheflag
taught the alt-right a valuable lesson: their enemies were an untapped
source of unpaid labour who could be recruited as faux gatekeepers,
unknowing transmitters of confusion and demoralization. The left’s slow
adoption of digital canvassing methods and failure to acknowledge
far-right populism as a legitimate threat has also played a role.
Instead of subverting the rules of the game—which once belonged to
them—leftists continue to walk into traps. They end up targeting the
ever-shifting fascist symbols designed to be obsolete instead of
analysing and learning from the root of the problem – the alt-right’s
success at assimilating and organizing supporters online. Short-sighted
by anxious goodwill, progressives have inadvertently placed themselves
into the position of online janitors. They remain stuck in the
pre-digital past, adhering to outdated rules of symbol creation,
dissemination and control.

In the digital era, anyone with access to a computer is a graphic
designer, and anyone with access to the internet is a propagandist. It
takes less time to manufacture an endless stream of far-right symbols
than it does to identify, analyse, detect, and remove them. Figuring out
the latest far-right dog whistles, exploits and in-jokes is a full-time
job. Automating the process by building bots to flag online hate speech
cannot be a long-term solution. First, removing content does not
deradicalize the posters, it simply makes them less visible to the
general public. This inadvertently masks the severity of the situation
we currently find ourselves in: far-right parties are gaining power all
over Europe. Election results seem shocking in part because so much
online content is tidied up. Second, bots cannot read between the lines.
Anti-racist technologies have increased far-right reliance on coded
language based on acronyms, innocuous words and emojis, which morph on a
daily basis and escape detection. *Operation Google* involved the use of
‘unbannable’ company names such as ‘google’, ‘skype’ and ‘yahoo’ as
stand-ins for Jews, African Americans, and Latinos respectively.[^20chapter19_20] As
with Operation \#reclaimtheflag, their goal was to trick google
algorithms into displaying racist images to innocent viewers, while at
the same time deceiving Google algorithms into censoring Google itself.
Third, far-right trolls often control multiple puppet accounts, and
generate new ones as soon as old ones are banned.

Controlling online platforms costs time, energy and nerves—resources
that might be better spent on assimilating left-wing armies to build a
counter-narrative to the far-right. Left-wing copypastas can help unite
leftists by outlining specific tasks, such as the formation of digital
flash mobs and targeted canvassing of social media groups. Flooding
fascist platforms with satirical content would catch the attention of
recent alt-right recruits—many of whom are just teenagers—and expose
them to alternate views. Raiding former left-wing forums would allow
expelled members to reclaim lost territory. For example, many anarchist
and leftist eco-groups have been overtaken by eco-fascists. The original
members were either thrown out or converted. These territories still
exist and can potentially be reclaimed. After all, the good news is that
any *progressive* with access to a computer is a graphic designer, and
any progressive with access to the internet is a propagandist. Memes
should be viewed for what they are—propaganda posters—and meme
dissemination adheres to the same principles guiding advertising firms:
repetition breeds familiarity, which leads to preference.

When it comes to coded language, the best strategy is to hijack it. The
far-right fears losing control over symbol creation. This was evident
when 4channers were brainstorming culture jamming strategies in Honkpill
threads. Some users worried that conjoining Pepe with the LGBT flag was
too risky because normies would assume that Pepe was *un*cancelled.
Which could lead to Pepe being reappropriated by the left, stripping the
far-right of their favorite mascot. One hesitant 4channer outlined his
concern in an Operation Honk thread: ‘All your \[sic\] doing is taking
the greatest meme /pol/ ever had and making it gay. You are letting the
fags claim Pepe, not the other way around. Because anybody outside of
the chans sees rainbow Pepe and thinks LGBT /.../ your doing their dirty
work for them.’ Other users echoed similar concerns:s the real danger to
Pepe is appropriation, *not* cancellation.

![Fig. 11: Pepe Instagram collage created by clusterduck, a left-wing
artist collective that uses memes to protest the climate crisis. They
have reappropriated Pepe to promote a positive message of inclusivity.
<https://www.instagram.com/realclusterfuck>](/Users/c.c.arkenbouthva.nl/Documents/GitHub/CriticalMemeReader/imgs/19.11.jpeg) 

What the alt-right fears most is losing media attention and its
reputation for being an edgy counterculture that defends ‘free-speech’
for the underdogs. Punk was killed by popular culture, not law
enforcers. Anti-fascists can fight culture-jamming tactics using signal
flooding. When clown emojis and Joker memes inadvertently became
mainstream, far-right trolls were furious because they could no longer
distinguish between their own ironic shitposts and normie sincerity.
They were forced to revert to Honkler, a less subtle symbol, due to
Pepe’s controversial status. If leftists were to casually reclaim Pepe,
the alt-right would be forced to invent a new mascot, or resort to using
explicitly fascist symbols which cannot be reappropriated – such as
swastikas and Odal runes. Forcing them to revert to old-fashioned
symbols would repulse their center-leaning members as well as future
recruits who have not yet become desensitized.

Of course, continuously co-opting freshly-minted right-wing symbols
doesn’t eliminate the alt-right—culture-jamming is just one tool in
their digital toolbox. But it would damage their reputation as dissident
purveyors of online culture, and prevent the unnecessary surrender of
arbitrary symbols. Repossessing additional hacktivist tools and using
them against the alt-right would signal the beginning of an online
anti-fascist retaliation. Memetic warfare is more immediate and
accessible than real-life demonstrations. It is not susceptible to
police disruptions and pandemics. If anti-fascists build an active
online presence, they can assimilate enough supporters to demote the
alt-right from *provoker* into an inept *reactor*.

## References

Anti-Defamation League. “Best Practices For Responding To Cyberhate.”
2021. <https://www.adl.org/best-practices-for-responding-to-cyberhate>.

BBC News. “OK Hand Sign Added To List Of Hate Symbols.” September 27,
2019. <https://www.bbc.com/news/newsbeat-49837898>.

Beran, Dale. “Why Does 8chan Exist at All?”. *Medium*, September 27,
2019.
<https://medium.com/@DaleBeran/why-does-8chan-exist-at-all-33a8942dbeb2>.

Ehrlich, David. “‘Joker’ Review: For Better or Worse, Superhero Movies
Will Never Be the Same.” *Indiewire,* August 31, 2019.
<a href="https://www.indiewire.com/2019/08/joker-review-joaquin-phoenix-1202170236/">https://www.indiewire.com/2019/08/joker-review-joaquin-phoenix-1202170236/</a>.

Evans, Robert. “Ignore The Poway Synagogue Shooter’s Manifesto: Pay
Attention To 8Chan’s /Pol/ Board.” *Bellingcat,* March 15, 2019.
<https://www.bellingcat.com/news/americas/2019/04/28/ignore-the-poway-synagogue-shooters-manifesto-pay-attention-to-8chans-pol-board/>.

Feinberg, Ashley. “This Is The Daily Stormer's Playbook.” *Huffpost UK,* December
13, 2017.
<https://www.huffpost.com/entry/daily-stormer-nazi-style-guide_n_5a2ece19e4b0ce3b344492f2>.

Garland, Joshua, Keyan Ghazi-Zahedi, Jean-Gabriel Young, Laurent
Hébert-Dufresne, and Mirta Galesic. “Countering Hate on Social Media:
Large Scale Classification of Hate and Counter Speech.” *Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms*, June 2, 2020.
<https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.alw-1.13>.

Holt, Jared. “White Nationalists Adopt Clowns As Their Next Racist
Symbol (Yes, Seriously).” *Right Wing Watch,* April 4, 2019.
<https://www.rightwingwatch.org/post/white-nationalists-adopt-clowns-as-their-next-racist-symbol-yes-seriously/>.

Lee, Chris. “How Joker Became the Most Hated, Loved, Obsessed-Over Movie
of 2019.” *Vulture,* October 9, 2019.
<https://www.vulture.com/2019/10/all-the-joker-controversy-and-threats-explained.html>.

Pink, Aiden. “No Joke: White Nationalists Are Now Using Clowns To Spread
Hatred.” *Forward,* May 6, 2019.
<https://forward.com/fast-forward/423812/white-nationalist-clowns-honk-honkler/>.

KnowYourMeme. “Putting on Clown Makeup.” Accessed March 4, 2021.
<a href="https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/putting-on-clown-makeup">https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/putting-on-clown-makeup</a>.

Rozsa, Matthew. “‘Joker’ is a Wildly Uneven Mess – and a Dangerous one
in the Wrong Hands.” *Salon,* October 4, 2019.
<https://www.salon.com/2019/10/04/joker-review-todd-phillips-incels-alt-right-warner-bros/>.

Rozsa, Matthew. ”U.S. Military Issues Warning to Troops About Incel
Violence at Joker Screenings.” *Gizmodo,* August 24, 2019.
<https://io9.gizmodo.com/u-s-military-issues-warning-to-troops-about-incel-viol-1838412331>.

Tarrant, Brendon. *The Great Replacement.* 2017.
<https://img-prod.ilfoglio.it/userUpload/The_Great_Replacementconvertito.pdf>

Tarrant, Brendon. *The Great Replacement: A Final Manifesto*. 2017.
<https://www.docdroid.net/Q4nIbBM/the-great-replacement-original-brenton-tarrant-pdf#page=21>.

Trent, John, “Report: Blizzard Forbids ‘Okay’ Symbol in Overwatch League
Arena – Claims It’s a ‘White Power Symbol’.” *Bounding into Comics,*
April 5, 2019.
<a href="https://boundingintocomics.com/2019/04/05/report-blizzard-forbids-okay-symbol-in-overwatch-league-arena-claims-its-a-white-power-symbol/">https://boundingintocomics.com/2019/04/05/report-blizzard-forbids-okay-symbol-in-overwatch-league-arena-claims-its-a-white-power-symbol/</a>.

Weimann, Gabriel and Ari Ben Am. "Digital Dog Whistles: The New Online
Language of Extremism." *International Journal of Security Studies* 2,
no. 1(2020).Available at:
<a href="https://digitalcommons.northgeorgia.edu/ijoss/vol2/iss1/4">https://digitalcommons.northgeorgia.edu/ijoss/vol2/iss1/4</a>

Žižek, Slavoj. “More on Joker: from Apolitical Nihilism to a New Left,
or Why Trump is no Joker.” *The Philosophical Salon,* November 11, 2019.
<https://thephilosophicalsalon.com/more-on-joker-from-apolitical-nihilism-to-a-new-left-or-why-trump-is-no-joker/>.

[^20chapter19_1]: *Krautpol* refers to German-speaking far-right factions active on
    4chan and 8chan. After helping Trump win the 2016 presidential
    elections by supporting their US members, krautpol is now focusing
    on Identitarian movements in Europe by organizing raids and raising
    money for rallies.

[^20chapter19_2]: Ashley Feinberg, “This Is The Daily Stormer's Playbook,” *Huffpost
    UK,* December 13, 2017,
    <a href="https://www.huffpost.com/entry/daily-stormer-nazi-style-guide%5C_n%5C_5a2ece19e4b0ce3b344492f2">https://www.huffpost.com/entry/daily-stormer-nazi-style-guide\_n\_5a2ece19e4b0ce3b344492f2</a>.

[^20chapter19_3]: Dale Beran, “Why Does 8chan Exist at All?,” *Medium*, September
    27, 2019,
    <a href="https://medium.com/@DaleBeran/why-does-8chan-exist-at-all-33a8942dbeb2">https://medium.com/@DaleBeran/why-does-8chan-exist-at-all-33a8942dbeb2</a>.

[^20chapter19_4]: Brenton Tarrant, *The Great Replacement* (2017), 13,
    <a href="https://img-prod.ilfoglio.it/userUpload/The%5C_Great%5C_Replacementconvertito.pdf">https://img-prod.ilfoglio.it/userUpload/The\_Great\_Replacementconvertito.pdf</a>

[^20chapter19_5]: “OK Hand Sign Added to List Of Hate Symbols,” *BBC News,*
    September 27, 2019, <a href="https://www.bbc.com/news/newsbeat-49837898">https://www.bbc.com/news/newsbeat-49837898</a>.

[^20chapter19_6]: Robert Evans, “Ignore the Poway Synagogue Shooter’s Manifesto: Pay
    Attention To 8Chan’s /Pol/ Board,” *Bellingcat*, March 15, 2019,
    <a href="https://www.bellingcat.com/news/americas/2019/04/28/ignore-the-poway-synagogue-shooters-manifesto-pay-attention-to-8chans-pol-board/">https://www.bellingcat.com/news/americas/2019/04/28/ignore-the-poway-synagogue-shooters-manifesto-pay-attention-to-8chans-pol-board/</a>.

[^20chapter19_7]: Brendon Tarrant, “*The Great Replacement: A Final Manifesto*”
    (2017), 21,
    <a href="https://www.docdroid.net/Q4nIbBM/the-great-replacement-original-brenton-tarrant-pdf%5C#page=21">https://www.docdroid.net/Q4nIbBM/the-great-replacement-original-brenton-tarrant-pdf\#page=21</a>.

[^20chapter19_8]: Tarrant, *Great Replacement,* 147.

[^20chapter19_9]: Jared Holt, “White Nationalists Adopt Clowns As Their Next Racist
    Symbol (Yes, Seriously),” *Right Wing Watch*, April 4, 2019,
    <a href="https://www.rightwingwatch.org/post/white-nationalists-adopt-clowns-as-their-next-racist-symbol-yes-seriously/">https://www.rightwingwatch.org/post/white-nationalists-adopt-clowns-as-their-next-racist-symbol-yes-seriously/</a>.

[^20chapter19_10]: Aiden Pink, “No Joke: White Nationalists Are Now Using Clowns To
    Spread Hatred,” *Forward,* 6 May 2019,
    <a href="https://forward.com/fast-forward/423812/white-nationalist-clowns-honk-honkler/">https://forward.com/fast-forward/423812/white-nationalist-clowns-honk-honkler/</a>.

[^20chapter19_11]: Matthew Rozsa, “‘Joker’ is a Wildly Uneven Mess – and a Dangerous
    one in the Wrong Hands,” *Salon,* October 4, 2019,
    <a href="https://www.salon.com/2019/10/04/joker-review-todd-phillips-incels-alt-right-warner-bros/">https://www.salon.com/2019/10/04/joker-review-todd-phillips-incels-alt-right-warner-bros/</a>.

[^20chapter19_12]: David Ehrlich, “‘Joker’ Review: For Better or Worse, Superhero
    Movies Will Never Be the Same,” *Indiewire,* August 31, 2019,
    <a href="https://www.indiewire.com/2019/08/joker-review-joaquin-phoenix-1202170236/">https://www.indiewire.com/2019/08/joker-review-joaquin-phoenix-1202170236/</a>.

[^20chapter19_13]: Matthew Rozsa, “U.S. Military Issues Warning to Troops About
    Incel Violence at Joker Screenings,” *Gizmodo,* August 24, 2019,
    <a href="https://io9.gizmodo.com/u-s-military-issues-warning-to-troops-about-incel-viol-1838412331">https://io9.gizmodo.com/u-s-military-issues-warning-to-troops-about-incel-viol-1838412331</a>.

[^20chapter19_14]: Chris Lee, “How Joker Became the Most Hated, Loved, Obsessed-Over
    Movie of 2019,” *Vulture,* October 9, 2019,
    <a href="https://www.vulture.com/2019/10/all-the-joker-controversy-and-threats-explained.html">https://www.vulture.com/2019/10/all-the-joker-controversy-and-threats-explained.html</a>.

[^20chapter19_15]: Slavoj Žižek, “More on Joker: from Apolitical Nihilism to a New
    Left, or Why Trump is no Joker,” *The Philosophical Salon,*
    November 11, 2019,
    <a href="https://thephilosophicalsalon.com/more-on-joker-from-apolitical-nihilism-to-a-new-left-or-why-trump-is-no-joker/">https://thephilosophicalsalon.com/more-on-joker-from-apolitical-nihilism-to-a-new-left-or-why-trump-is-no-joker/</a>.

[^20chapter19_16]: “Putting on Clown Makeup,” *Knowyourmeme*, 2019, Last accessed:
    March 4, 2021,
    <a href="https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/putting-on-clown-makeup">https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/putting-on-clown-makeup</a>.

[^20chapter19_17]: John Trent, “Report: Blizzard Forbids ‘Okay’ Symbol in Overwatch
    League Arena – Claims It’s a ‘White Power Symbol’,” *Bounding into
    Comics,* April 5, 2019,
    <a href="https://boundingintocomics.com/2019/04/05/report-blizzard-forbids-okay-symbol-in-overwatch-league-arena-claims-its-a-white-power-symbol/">https://boundingintocomics.com/2019/04/05/report-blizzard-forbids-okay-symbol-in-overwatch-league-arena-claims-its-a-white-power-symbol/</a>.

[^20chapter19_18]: Joshua Garland et al., “Countering Hate on Social Media: Large
    Scale Classification of Hate and Counter Speech,” *Proceedings of
    the Fourth Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms,* June 2, 2020,
    <a href="https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.alw-1.13">https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.alw-1.13</a>.

[^20chapter19_19]: “Best Practices For Responding To Cyberhate,” *Anti-Defamation
    League,*
    <a href="https://www.adl.org/best-practices-for-responding-to-cyberhate">https://www.adl.org/best-practices-for-responding-to-cyberhate</a>.

[^20chapter19_20]: Gabriel Weimann and Ari Ben Am, “Digital Dog Whistles: The New
    Online Language of Extremism,” *International Journal of Security
    Studies,* 2, no. 1 (2020).
    <a href="https://digitalcommons.northgeorgia.edu/ijoss/vol2/iss1/4">https://digitalcommons.northgeorgia.edu/ijoss/vol2/iss1/4</a>
