---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Pepe the Frog Is Love and Peace! His Second Life in Hong Kong\
\
Caspar Chan\

## Introduction\

In Hong Kong, starting in June 2019, a series of demonstrations and
civil disobedience actions were launched, protesting the government’s
controversial proposal of the extradition law. The political situation
has turned out to be tense and, to an extent, violent, where one can see
police in blue and protestors in black assaulting each other; where one
can see countless Molotov’s cocktails and tearing gases flying in front
of the backdrop of the metropolitan, where one can see an abyss
gradually being formed between the authorities and the Hong Konger
activists, and where one can also see how people possessing different
political views have moved their battleground from physical places to
online platforms amidst the pandemic. Amidst all this, one icon always
remains ubiquitous: the face of Pepe the Frog. Connoted as an alt-right
symbol, a figure of hatred and white nationalism, the meme of Pepe the
Frog sheds these meanings and signifies something very different in the
political drama in Hong Kong: love, peace and frustration towards the
government. Indeed, through repeated uses in different situations, the
meaning of memes also changes, which can result in a contrasting
understanding of the same meme by two groups of people. Investigating
the uses of the meme of Pepe the Frog in the current Hong Kong
situation, I will explore how politically charged memes can be
appropriated otherwise from their original contexts and significance.
Memes have the affordances and the flexibility to be entextualized out
of their original place and be re-contextualized by their users. In this
way, a meme does not only appoint one specific way of understanding, but
allows its viewers to derive and create their own ways of comprehending
the meme through continually identifying with the meme itself.

## The Entextualizability and Appropriability of Memes\

Memes have taken on a variety of roles in online spaces. For one, their
jocular aspect has been manipulated by users to refer to or mimic other
contents on various social media[^25chapter24_1], and by the same token, memes that
parody public and political figures have also appeared, in turn giving
rise to political memes.[^25chapter24_2] Pepe the Frog is such a meme, whose
prominence on online social platforms has allowed him to be a
representative of political memes of many sorts. His adoption by the
American far-right as a symbol of ‘white nationalism, neo-Nazism and
anti-immigration,’[^25chapter24_3] his relation with Trump,[^25chapter24_4] as well as his
personification of the ideology of ‘embrace your loserdom’ as
articulated by Dale Beran,[^25chapter24_5] has earned this frog-looking caricature
his own political dimension and connotation.

If we understand a meme as a sign, then as with understandings of signs
in general, we understand memes contextually. In other words, if a meme
enters a context different from its original one, its reading can be
different, and thus the viewers can also understand it otherwise. Being
able to be contextualized in one situation implies that a sign can also
be *entextualized* from that context and *recontextualized* in
another*.* By entextualization, Piia Varis and Jan Blommaert mean that a
sign can be extracted from its original context and re-inserted into
another ‘involving different participation frameworks’, which allow
‘different meaning outcomes.’[^25chapter24_6] Richard Bauman and Charles Briggs also
express that entextualisation as a

process ‘of making a stretch of our linguistic and/or
semiotic…production into a unit - a text - that can be lifted out of its
interactional setting’[^25chapter24_7] Content from social media have a high
possibility to be entextualisable.[^25chapter24_8] Through numerous clicks of
transmitting and copy and-pasting a meme, its formal features can
eventually be levered from their original context.\
Now that a meme, being entextualised, floats from its original niche, it
opens up the possibility to be perceived in a different way. Michele
Knobel and Colin Lankshear rightly point out that while a meme is
circulated on social media, its content can never be ‘intact’[^25chapter24_9]. The
more exposure a meme gains with its viewers, the more versatile the meme
becomes. Throughout the meme’s dissemination, new understandings
and‘idiosyncratic spins’, can be accrued according to its viewers’ own
referential background. In other words, after being extracted its
original context, a meme can also be ‘remixed’ with new elements in the
new context, and appropriated by its new viewers. This entails the
shedding of a meme’s original connotation, regardless of whether the new
appropriator of the meme knows of this original connotation or not, and
the acquisition of new significance in its new situation.

So, a meme’s ability to be entextualised from its original context
entails the possibility of its subsequently being appropriated in
another. But I suspect that there remains one more step before an
entextualised meme can be perceived and used otherwise by its new
appropriators. In other words, simply being taken away from the meme’s
original context does not and necessarily mean that a new meaning is
automatically assigned once it enters the new context. For a new meaning
to emerge, an identification by the new appropriators must identify with
the meme. In the case of a political movement where the situation is
dynamic, such as that in Hong Kong, a continuous, negotiable
identification can arise.

## Left or Right? — The Political Case in Hong Kong\

To understand how the meme can be laden with a different political
charge in Hong Kong, it is useful to first look at the political context
in Hong Kong. The current political turmoil started with the disputed
proposal of the ‘extradition bill’ by the Hong Kong government in early
2019. On June 9, about one million Hong Kongers flooded the streets to
protest this proposal. Hoping for an agreeable response from their
government, the Hong Kongers instead received a reply from the
authorities stating that the bill had already been widely consulted and
discussed, and thus the government would proceed to the legislation of
this bill anyway. Frustrated, agitated, and disappointed, Hong Kongers
began a series of protests, rallies and activist actions to counteract
the government’s proposal. This wave of political action has thus
received the name ‘The Anti-Extradition Movement’.

Gradually, alongside the opposition against the government’s proposal,
other political demands were also voiced. Five demands have emerged from
the protestors: as one of the movement’s slogans goes: ‘Five Demands,
No\[t\] One Less!’ (五⼤訴求 缺⼀不可). The five demands are: 1)
withdrawal of the Extradition Law; 2) retraction of the proclamation
that the protests are ’riots’; 3) withdrawal of criminal charges against
all protestors; 4) establishment of an independent committee to
investigate the abuse of power by the police; and 5) implementation of
dual universal suffrage. With the government as the common enemy, the
movement’s anti-establishment, anti-oppressive character also implies
its motivation in dethroning the current ruling atmosphere in Hong Kong.
This facet of the movement echoes some of the ideologies of left-wing
politics in the Western sense. What marks the movement’s difference from
traditional left-wing politics, however, is that the movement is not
based on the yearning to fight against class inequality. It did not
start as a struggle to combat economic discrimination. Instead, the
Anti-Extradition Movement began with a wish to intervene in the process
of law-making. However large the social movement has become in its later
stages, it has always and mainly aimed at attempting to reform the
governmental system. ‘Democracy’ and ‘freedom’ are the two keywords
resonating through the whole movement, but rarely are there people who
would think that ‘improving the wealth gap or ‘refining social welfare’
should occupy a primary place in this movement.

Nonetheless, the movement quickly shifted towards a ‘nationalistic’
approach. More aggressive actions were also performed. For instance,
seeing both the Hong Kong government and Chinese central government as
the enemy, the protestors initiated a wave of boycotts of Chinese
products and stores, as well as those businesses who advocated support
to the government. From July 2019, protestors began to sort all
businesses into one of four color-coded categories, each designating an
action to be taken: 1) ‘Renovate the Black’: those stores and shops run
by the mainland Chinese, politicians from the pro establishment parties
and the government were to be destroyed and dismantled; 2) ‘Decorate the
Red’: the walls and facades of the shops established by or related to
Chinese businesses were to be graffitied and pasted with activist
posters; 3) ‘Boycott the Blue’: businesses who showed support for the
government were to be boycotted; and 4) ‘Visit the Yellow’: local,
indigenous shops run by Hong Kongers and who supported the movement were
welcomed by the protestors and were to be visited. The protestors also
focused more on finding what constitutes a ‘real’ Hong Konger,
suspecting any non-movement-supporting business or person. With the
above purist ideals in the protestors’ minds, there even existed a brief
moment of ‘witch-hunting’, where the Hong Kongers competed to be more
passionate about the movement and more resistant to anything not Hong
Kong-related. Such purist action is termed ⾾⿈, ‘to compete to be more
yellow’, where the color yellow is the symbol of this movement. While
one store could be boycotted and destroyed because it was not ‘yellow
enough’, some protestors became more radical and extreme, criticising
and alienating other fellow protestors.

![](media/image1.png){width="5.875in" height="2.6666666666666665in"}

Figure 1: A poster circulated on LIGHK, a popular Hong Kong forum, which
illustrate the four categories as well s what to act accordingly. Screen
captured from <a href="https://lihkg.com/thread/1626988/page/1">https://lihkg.com/thread/1626988/page/1</a>.

One could also attack another protestor as being a “’eftard (左膠), who
sought a universal struggle and focused on non-violent ways to continue
to act. ‘Leftard’ is an interesting term, and it first appeared in the
public discourse in around 2014 when the Umbrella Movement arose,
sparked by the intervention of the National People’s Congress Standing
Committee, who implemented a restrictive election framework for both
Chief Executive and the Legislative Council. At the beginning of that
movement, calmer ways and principles for counteracting the police and
the government gained support from many Hong Kongers, and could be
summarised as ‘Peaceful, Reasonable, Non-violent’ (和理非). But as the
Umbrella Movement proceeded, many protestors started to think that
because the actions carried out by the authorities and the police were
consideredbrutal, non-violent actions should be replaced by those more
aggressive so as to show their stance more firmly. From this point,
those who still believed that the movement could continue in a peaceful
manner were name-tagged as ‘bleeding-heart liberals’ (⼤愛撚, which is
literally translated as ‘big-love dickheads’). This group of people were
further seen as leftists, who, in the eyes of Hong Kongers, are
essentialized as communists and have also been called ‘leftards’. Though
the Umbrella Movement was halted about eleven weeks after its start,
this term, as well as the militaristic approach to counteracting
authority, have lasted beyond this point. As a result, five years later
in the Anti-Extradition Movement , one could be called a ‘leftard’ if
one was not ‘brave and military’ enough. This is a translation of 勇武,
a term which is used to refer to those protestors who fought directly
against the police, and contains the idea that their violence is
justified because the authorities first used violence against them. It
is also because of this that, generally speaking, no Hong Kongers
seethis movement as a leftist movement.\
\
Amidst the pandemic, and after the imposition of the National Security
Law on 1 July 2020, Hong Kongers now have other agendas in continuing
the movement. They have also revised their strategies for counteracting
the authorities. The ‘witch-hunt’ was halted, milder ways were adopted,
and the battleground has been moved online. Nonetheless, the notions of
‘yellow’ and ‘leftard’ still occupy a place in everyday discourse. In
any case, through all these changes, one can see that it is hard to
categorize the movement into a specific place on the political spectrum:
one can say that it reflects a certain degree of nationalism and
populism, but one should also not overlook the anti-establishment bent
and universal goals the Hong Kongers collectively seek. Neither can the
movement be interpreted as politically ‘central and neutral’, at least
in the Hong Kongers’ sense, who have adopted the view that ‘one should
never be central and neutral before great issues’.[^25chapter24_10] In short, the
political movement in Hong Kong reflects a certain ambiguity and
intuitiveness in characterizing its political orientation. On the other
hand, it can be argued that, to some extent, the mainstream way of
perceiving left/right politics could not fully be applied to the case of
Hong Kong. Be that as it may, it is this ambivalent and dynamic
atmosphere that gives birth to a Hong Kong where a new framework and way
of seeing things awaits. It also provides a ground where, as Varis and
Blommaert write, a new understanding of pre-existing signs and symbols
can be produced.[^25chapter24_11] Within difficult-to-define political background,
Pepe the Frog, well-known as a symbol of hatred, can receive his second
life in Hong Kong.

## Pepe the ‘Hong Konger’ — A Symbol of Love, Sympathy and Trolling\

Being fans of Trump’s presidency and shit-stirring online campaigns, as
well as the exaggeration and bragging of his anti-China stance, the Hong
Kong protestors must have been familiar withthe relation between Trump
and Pepe the Frog. Yet not many were aware of the relation between the
infamous meme and the alt-right, nor the meme’s trolling,
self-deprecating character[^25chapter24_12]. Instead, the sad-looking
amphibian-humanoid is seen as a symbol of resistance, even one of love
and peace, by the protestors in the Anti-Extradition Movement. ‘To me,
Pepe is just a Hello Kitty-like character,’ said a protestor in Daniel
Victor’s NYT report. ‘It just looks funny and captures the hearts of so
many youngsters,’ said a user of LIHKG, a popular forum in Hong
Kong.[^25chapter24_13] Pepe, shedding its alt-right connotation, is seen as an
uplifting, youthful comrade who accompanies Hong Kongers amidst the
political struggle.[^25chapter24_14]

The protestors embrace Pepe not as a loser or as a means to ignite
hatred, but as a persona the protestors feel related to, and one that
possesses the qualities being projected onto him by the protestors. For
instance, ‘Pepe the Press’, one wearing a helmet with the word ‘Press’,
holding a phone and wearing a vest, represents the press, the
journalists and reporters who work—even volunteer—in this movement,
symbolizing free press and a wish for justice to be upheld towards the
protestors. Another ‘Pepe the Protestor’, wearing a black shirt and a
yellow helmet (the attire of a protestor), lets out a cheer with fists
held in front of his chest. He too could be seen as an encouraging being
who offers comfort and solidarity to the protestors. To be sure, Hong
Kongers have created different artefacts with Pepe’s image and placed
them everywhere, in a sense that the more they project themselves and
their values onto Pepe, the more they ‘materialise’ them on Pepe to the
extent that their ‘Pepe self’ accompany them everywhere. Pepe could be
seen on walls and façades in common places like tunnels, bridges,
flyovers, and shopping malls all around Hong Kong.

Pepe is ubiquitous, as if Pepe had become a fellow Hong Konger, so
special as a symbol of the movement, but also familiar: a consolation a
Hong Konger can always count on.

![](media/image2.png){width="4.263888888888889in"
height="2.486111111111111in"}

Figure 2: ‘Pepe the Press’ graffitied by the Hong Kong protestors.
Screen captured from Daniel Victor, ‘Hong Kong Protesters Love Pepe the
Frog. No, They’re Not Alt-Right,’ The New York Times, August 19, 2019,
retrieved from https://
<a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/19/world/asia/hong-kong-protest-pepe-frog.html">www.nytimes.com/2019/08/19/world/asia/hong-kong-protest-pepe-frog.html</a>.

![Afbeelding met tekst, buiten Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image3.png){width="4.375in"
height="2.4583333333333335in"}

Figure 3: A flag showing a cheering Pepe. Photo from: © Getty Images /
Anadolu Agency / Miguel Candela. Screen captured from Igor Ogorodnev,
‘What the Uncanceling of Pepe the Frog – Just for HK Protests, Though –
Tells Us about US Media,’ RT Question More, September 21, 2019,
retrieved from
<a href="https://www.rt.com/op-ed/469318-pepe-frog-hong-king-media/">https://www.rt.com/op-ed/469318-pepe-frog-hong-king-media/</a>.

![Afbeelding met persoon, groep Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image4.png){width="4.083333333333333in"
height="2.736111111111111in"}

Figure 4: A graffiti of Pepe wearing the protestor’s helmet, smiling and
holding a fist with the words ‘Hong Kong Hang On!’ On the side. Photo
from Billy H.C. Kwok / Getty Images.

![Afbeelding met tekst, binnen, verschillend Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image5.png){width="4.083333333333333in"
height="2.2222222222222223in"}

Figure 5: A chains of Pepe with different look, hands in hands. Screen
captured from Denise Tsang (@denis\_tsang), ‘Love this Pepe-the-Frog
chain at the Shum Shui Po Lennon Wall,’ Twitter, August 23, 2019,
<a href="https://twitter.com/denise%5C_tsang/status/1164779085186211840?ref%5C_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1164779085186211840%7Ctwgr%5E%7Ctwcon%5Es1%5C_&amp;ref%5C_url=https%3A%2F%2Fstayhipp.com%2Fnews%2Fpepe-the-frog-as-a-symbol-for">https://twitter.com/denise\_tsang/status/1164779085186211840?ref\_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1164779085186211840%7Ctwgr%5E%7Ctwcon%5Es1\_&ref\_url=https%3A%2F%2Fstayhipp.com%2Fnews%2Fpepe-the-frog-as-a-symbol-for</a>.

![Afbeelding met persoon, sport Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image6.png){width="4.027777777777778in"
height="2.6944444444444446in"}

Figure 6: Graffiti of Pepe found outside the Central Government complex,
depicted with a board with the word ‘Hope’. Photo from Billy H.C. Kwok /
Getty Images

.

The Hong Kong protestors do not only use Pepe to personify their ideals:
Pepe is also used to express frustration and anger towards the
government and the police. For example, Pepe is depicted without one eye
after a journalist was shot in the eye by the police. Pepe is elsewhere
also depicted as a crying character, helping out two other characters,
LIHKG Pig (連登豬) and LIHKG Dog (連登狗), two mascots well-known on the
forum of LIHKG, when the three of them are attacked by a smoke grenade.
There has been much creativity derived from the depiction of Pepe the
Frog as sad, weeping and upset. Pepe relates the emotions sensed by the
protestors, and in turn, symbolises their disillusionment towards the
authorites.

Such a sensation of dissatisfaction, as well as the sense of being the
victimized underdog in the situation may echo the ideology of ‘loserdom’
adopted by the American alt-right in the manner described by Beran.[^25chapter24_15]
However, I contend that the two cases are different. For one, by
portraying Pepe as an injured character, the Hong Konger protestors
actively attempt to work as a voice for a change, so that no one will be
hurt ‘in the same way’. They are frustrated about the status quo,
intimidated by the violence done to them, and they illustrate such
bitterness by turning Pepe into the victim who suffers from these harms.
As demonstrated earlier, such depiction is the Hong Kongers’
‘Pepe-self’. It is the projection of the Hong Kongers’ feeling. But it
does not follow that they automatically fully agree with this depiction
*per se*.

By representing Pepe in these ways, the Hong Kongers attach him to the
naked reality of the political situation, aiming to prompt viewers to
reflect on the moral and/or social questions behind these moments.
Concurrently, such memes also work to denounce the suffering seemingly
inflicted upon the Hong Kongers as it is onto Pepe. It is at this point
that Hong Kong’s Pepe is distinguished from his counterpart in the US,
where the partisans of ‘Pepe the Loser’ passionately embrace his
self-effacing, bizarre, loser’s ’values’, rationalising them as an
attempt to alter their own ‘loser’ status.^17^

![](media/image7.png){width="3.361111111111111in"
height="3.361111111111111in"}

![Afbeelding met tekst, persoon, binnen Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image8.png){width="3.1527777777777777in"
height="4.208333333333333in"}

Figure 8: Pepe, with a yellow helmet, depicted as a patient with an eye
bleeding, with the words: Police Shot MY EYE. Give me back my eye!
Screen captured from Alvin Lum (@alvinllun), ‘In Queen Mary Hospital,
some medical staff showed support for one one lady who is shot blind on
Sun,’ Twitter, August 13, 2019, <a href="https://twitter.com/alvinllum/status/">https://twitter.com/alvinllum/status/</a>
1161161988547870720/photo/1.

![Afbeelding met tekst, persoon, buiten, mensen Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image9.png){width="3.7083333333333335in"
height="2.9305555555555554in"}

Figure 9: A sobbing Pepe with the words “Don’t Beat Me”, seemingly a
protest against police brutality. “2019 Hong Kong Anti-Extradition Bill
Protests - "Don't Beat Me" Pepe the Frog sign,” Know Your Meme, 2020,
retrieved from https://
<a href="http://knowyourmeme.com/photos/1543273-2019-hong-kong-anti-extradition-bill-protests">knowyourmeme.com/photos/1543273-2019-hong-kong-anti-extradition-bill-protests</a>.

In addition, Pepe the Frog has also gone viral among Hong Kong netizens,
further spreading the ideas of the political movement to internet users.
He appears in the form of Whatsapp and Telegrams stickers, personifying
both encouraging emotions and the rage and will-to-troll against the
authorities. In using these stickers, the social media users can relate
the context of their conversation to the political situation they are
in, incidentally mock the authorities, or simply relate the emotions of
a specific Pepe to their instant feeling (of course in turn, upon seeing
Pepe, the user of that sticker would also be reminded of the political
movement to some degree). In every aforementioned case, by relating
individual emotions and political realities to Pepe the Frog, this meme
has become politicized and functions as a protesting strategy in Hong
Kong, just in a very different way to its political deployments in the
USA.

![Afbeelding met diverse, verschillend, verschillende Automatisch
gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image10.png){width="6.819444444444445in"
height="1.5555555555555556in"}

Figure 10: A Pepe sticker pack as a troll to the government and police,
including one, the third one from the left on the bottom row, depicting
the chief executive of Hong Kong, Ms Carrie Lam, “Polite Pepe,”
WhatSticker, <a href="https://whatsticker.online/p/18668317p5Lmt/HK/zh">https://whatsticker.online/p/18668317p5Lmt/HK/zh</a>.

![](media/image11.png){width="6.402777777777778in" height="6.25in"}

Figure 11: One of the many sticker packs depicting Pepe as the Hong Kong
protestors and Pepe as the Hong Kong police. “Fighting Pepe,”
Stickers.clould, retrieved from
<a href="https://stickers.cloud/pack/fighting-pepe">https://stickers.cloud/pack/fighting-pepe</a>.

## The Becoming of ‘Pepe the Omnipotent’\

Pepe the Frog, escaping from its detestable character in the US, has
become an adorable figure, a mascot in the political movement in Hong
Kong. The singular political situation in Hong Kong allows the city to
be an incubator for new understandings of signs and symbols. Yet such a
context does not necessarily mean that any sign or symbol can
automatically acquire new meanings once they enter Hong Kong. While new
meanings await when a meme enters a new context, and social media
content is a highly entextualizable environment, there remains a gap
between a new meaning being *awaited* and a new meaning being
*realized*. In other words, after being entextualized from its old
context, but before being appropriated in the new context, an additional
step is required. This is where Pepe the Frog is able to acquire his
diverse characters. Specifically, this is where the characters taken up
by Pepe can be *negotiated* and *identified* by Hong Kongers. This step,
therefore, is crucial because it links the free-floating Pepe to how it
is later materialized in the political movement.

To begin with, the omnipresence of Pepe in Hong Kong indicates that the
Hong Konger protestors relate to him. I argue that such relation is an
identification, and has a bilateral dimension: while the Hong Konger
protestors can identify their sadness, frustration and anger with Pepe,
Pepe can also be made to relate by representing an injured journalist, a
hopeful protestor, the corrupt police, etc. There is a continual
negotiation of identification between Pepe and the Hong Konger
protestors that allows Pepe to take up different personae. Pepe, thus,
can become an omnipotent being. And this continual negotiation of
identification is the crucial step that links entextualization and
appropriation together.

Sirpa Leppänen et al. argue that within social media contexts, it is
such a process of identification that first allows entextualization to
occur. They suggest that, while social media have gradually become
‘grassroots arenas’ where different cultural groups interact, these
interactions and activities oftentimes ‘overlap, complement and
intertwine’ with their offline affairs. While identifying with the
content fromsocial media is a recurring process, just as how social
groups continually identify themselves via offline social activities,
there exists an intertwined relationship between the two wheels of
identification. This process finally leads to the entextualization of
the content from its original context on the social media.[^25chapter24_16]

This mechanism is a good description of the case of Pepe in Hong Kong.
Through such identification, the appropriation of Pepe in the new
context is also made possible. While the protestors engage themselves in
the political movement, they are also concurrently exposed to different
content available in the online arena, which in turn would reflect back
upon their offline situation in their interpretation of this content.
Being fans of Trump increases the possibility they might encounter the
meme of Pepe the Frog, but extracting the frowning, grumpy frog from its
context of hatred to become a symbol of genuine sadness, hope, anger and
trolling requires a linkage be made by the Hong Konger protestors
between Pepe and the political context in Hong Kong. Such a linkage is
only possible through a continuous dialectical identification between
the Hong Konger protestors and Pepe. And such a linkage, due to this
continuous dialectical identification, leads to Pepe’s extextualization
from its original context and his final appropriation by Hong Kongers.

To further illustrate using ‘Pepe the Press’ as an example, we can see
that the identification process goes like this: Hong Kongers first feel
the importance of the press in the political movement by their continued
presence and support. With that in mind, Hong Kongers project such a
thought onto Pepe when encountering him online. Such an encounter is
where the two wheels—the ceaseless social events happening to the Hong
Kongers and the recurrent online appearance of Pepe before them—meet.
Projecting their subjective thoughts onto Pepe implies that the Hong
Kongers can identify their experience with him. Such identification
first allows Pepe to be dragged from its original online
circle—*entextualised*—and to be harnessed in the new ‘Hong Kongers’
circle’—*appropriated*. It is also during such identification that, as
Bauman and Briggs put it, the Hong Kongers can ‘make a stretch’ of their
experiences into Pepe, pulling him from his original context.[^25chapter24_17] It is
at this moment where ‘Pepe the Press’ can rise, where Pepe takes up the
character the Hong Kongers assign to him. Along the same vein, the Hong
Konger protestors project different experiences and emotions from the
dynamic offline arena onto Pepe. From this, different characters—‘Pepe
the One-eye Journalist’, ‘Pepe the Protestor’, ‘Carrie Lam Pepe—are
negotiated and then assigned to him. Such continual negotiation of
identification enables Pepe to assume different personae. Identifying
with Pepe, the Hong Kongers can then appropriate the meme to their
advantage and make Pepe their own possession, devising and weaponizing
different Pepes in different arenas.

![](media/image12.png){width="6.263888888888889in"
height="4.055555555555555in"}

Figure 12: How Pepe is eventually entextualized from its original
context to be appropriated by the Hong Kongers in a new context through
recurrent identification

The way Pepe has gained his second life in Hong Kongshows that one can
identify a meme through relating to one’s own referential background,
experiences and emotions, and this is where entextualization can occur
and appropriation can follow. Born amid Hong Kong’s political turmoil,
an ambiguous and turbulent zone, Pepe the Hong Konger shows us how a
political meme can attain new meanings. He shows us how memes can
acquire various characters and express diverse characteristics. He also
shows us that memes do not only appear as a joke or parodybut also allow
us to reflect on more serious affairs, such as political and social
issues[^25chapter24_18]. We must therefore ask what memes can mean to us and do for
us besides merely trolling others. Can political memes be salvaged from
their bare joking aspect, and be involved in a political movement in a
more agonistic way? Pepe the Omnipotent’s response seems to be
affirmative.

## References

Australian Broadcasting Corporation. “Pepe Cartoonist Kills off
Character That Became Hate symbol.” *Australian Broadcasting
Corporation*, May 9, 2017. <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-09/">http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-09/</a>
pepe-cartoonist -kills-off-character-that-became-hate-symbol/8509280.

Bauman, Richard, and Charles L. Briggs. “Poetics and Performance As
Critical Perspectives on Language and Social Life.” *Annual Review of
Anthropology* 19 (1990): 59–88.

Dawkins, Richard. *The Selfish Gene*. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 1976.

Beran, Dale. “4chan: The Skeleton Key to the Rise of Trump.” *Medium*,
February 14, 2017.
<a href="https://medium.com/@DaleBeran/4chan-the-skeleton-key-to-the-rise">https://medium.com/@DaleBeran/4chan-the-skeleton-key-to-the-rise</a>
of-trump-624e7cb798cb.

Echevarria, Gina. “How This Frog Meme Became a Symbol of Hope and Hate.”
*Insider,* October 8, 2020.
<a href="https://www.businessinsider.com/pepe-frog-meme-hate-symbol-hope">https://www.businessinsider.com/pepe-frog-meme-hate-symbol-hope</a>
hong-kong-protesters-2019-10?r=DE&IR=T.

Galinsky, Adam D., et al. "The Reappropriation of Stigmatizing Labels:
Implications for Social Identity." In *Identity Issues in Groups*, 221 -
256. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2003.

Glitsos, Laura, and James Hall. “The Pepe the Frog Meme: An Examination
of Social, Political, and Cultural Implications through the Tradition of
the Darwinian Absurd.” *Journal for Cultural Research* 23, no. 4 (2019):
381 - 395.

Huntington, Heidi E. “Subversive Memes: Internet Memes as a Form of
Visual Rhetoric.” *AoIR Selected Papers of Internet Research* (2013).

Knobel, Michele, and Colin Lankshear. “Online Memes, Affinities, and
Cultural Production.” *A New Literacies Sampler* 29 (2007): 199-227.

KnowYourMeme. “2019 Hong Kong Anti-Extradition Bill Protests - "Don't
Beat Me" Pepe the Frog sign.” 2020. <a href="https://knowyourmeme.com/photos/">https://knowyourmeme.com/photos/</a>
1543273-2019-hong-kong-anti-extradition-bill-protests.

Know Your Meme. “Pepe the Frog - Pepe Timeline.”2015. https://
knowyourmeme. com/photos/942029-pepe-the-frog.

Ko, Christina. “How Pepe the Frog Became Face of Hong Kong Protests –
Despite Cartoon Being a Symbol of Hate in US.” *South China Morning
Post,* August 17, 2019. https://
<a href="http://www.scmp.com/lifestyle/arts-culture/article/3023060/how-pepe-frog-became-face">www.scmp.com/lifestyle/arts-culture/article/3023060/how-pepe-frog-became-face</a>
hong-kong-protests-despite-cartoon.

Kuipers, Giselinde. “‘Where Was King Kong When We Needed Him?’ Public
Discourse, Digital Disaster Jokes, and the Functions of Laughter After
9/11.” *The Journal of American Culture* 28, no. 1 (2005): 70–84.

Kulkarni, Anushka. “Internet Meme and Political Discourse: A study on
the Impact of Internet Meme as a Tool in Communicating Political
Satire.” *Journal of Content, Community & Communication Amity School of
Communication* 6 (2017): 13-17.

Lamjj (@Lamjj5). “Pepe and his friends in hong kong.” Twitter*,* August
21, 2019. https://
<a href="http://twitter.com/Lamjj5/status/1163972363643318272/photo/1">twitter.com/Lamjj5/status/1163972363643318272/photo/1</a>.

Lankshear, Colin, and Michele Knobel. *New Literacies: Everyday
Practices and Classroom Learning*. 2nd Ed. Maidenhead: Open University
Press, 2006.

Law, Nathan (@nathanlawkc). “5 demands, not one less.” Twitter, October
5, 2019. https://
<a href="http://twitter.com/nathanlawkc/status/1180241550724517894?lang=en">twitter.com/nathanlawkc/status/1180241550724517894?lang=en</a>.

Leppänen, Sirpa, et al. “Entextualization and Resemiotization As
Resources for Identification in Social Media.” In *The Language of
Social Media: Identity And Community on the Internet*, edited by Philip
Seargeant and Caroline Tagg, 112-136. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.

Lessig, Lawrence. *Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid
Economy*. London: Bloomsbury, 2008.

LIHKG Forum. <a href="https://lihkg.com/">https://lihkg.com/</a>.

Lum, Alvin (@alvinllun). “In Queen Mary Hospital, Some Medical Staff
Showed Support for One Lady Who is Shot Blind on Sun.” Twitter*,* August
13, 2019. <a href="https://twitter.com/">https://twitter.com/</a>
alvinllum/status/1161161988547870720/photo/1.

Naam Ngon Geoi Sii \[南岸居⼠\]. “‘Zhongli’ De Yuanzui「中⽴」的原罪.
\[The Sin of Neutrality\].” *Standnews,* February 29, 2020.
<a href="https://www.thestandnews.com/politics/">https://www.thestandnews.com/politics/</a>
%E4%B8%AD%E7%AB%8B-%E7%9A%84%E5%8E%9 F%E7%BD%AA/.

Ogorodnev, Igor. “What the Uncanceling of Pepe the Frog – Just for HK
Protests, Though – Tells Us about US Media.” *RT Question More,*
September 21, 2019. https://
<a href="http://www.rt.com/op-ed/469318-pepe-frog-hong-king-media/">www.rt.com/op-ed/469318-pepe-frog-hong-king-media/</a>.

Shifman, Limor. “An Anatomy of a Youtube Meme.” *New Media and Society*
14, no. 2. (2012): 187 - 203.

Stickers.cloud. “Fighting Pepe.” Stickers.cloud*,*
<a href="https://stickers.cloud/pack/fighting-pepe">https://stickers.cloud/pack/fighting-pepe</a>.

Theodoropoulou, Irene. “Mediatized Vernacularization: On the Structure,
Entextualization and Resemiotization of Varoufakiology.” *Discourse,
Context & Media* 14 (2016): 28– 39.

Tsang, Denise (@denis\_tsang). “Love this Pepe-the-Frog chain at the
Shum Shui Po Lennon Wall.” Twitter, August 23, 2019.
<a href="https://twitter.com/denise%5C_tsang/status/">https://twitter.com/denise\_tsang/status/</a>
1164779085186211840?ref\_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctw
term%5E1164779085186211840%7Ctwgr%5E%7Ctwcon%5Es1\_&ref\_url=https%3A
%2F%2Fstayhipp.com%2Fnews%2Fpepe-the-frog-as-a-symbol-for-hong-kong
protestors %2F.

Varis, Piia, and Jan Blommaert. “Conviviality and Collectives on Social
Media: Virality, Memes, and New Social Structures.” *Multilingual
Margins: A Journal of Multilingualism from the Periphery* 2, no. 1
(2015): 31 - 45.

Vickery, Jacqueline Ryan. “The Curious Case of Confession Bear: The
Reappropriation of Online Macro-Image Memes.” *Information,
Communication & Society* 17, no. 3 (2014): 301–25.

Victor, Daniel. “Hong Kong Protesters Love Pepe the Frog. No, They’re
Not Alt-Right.” *The New York Times,* August 19, 2019.
<a href="https://www.nytimes.com/">https://www.nytimes.com/</a>
2019/08/19/world/asia/hong-kong-protest-pepe-frog.html.

WhatSticker. “Polite Pepe.”
<a href="https://whatsticker.online/p/18668317p5Lmt/HK/">https://whatsticker.online/p/18668317p5Lmt/HK/</a> zh.

[^25chapter24_1]: Laura Glitsos and James Hall, “The Pepe the Frog Meme: An
    Examination of Social, Political, and Cultural Implications Through
    the Tradition of the Darwinian Absurd,” *Journal for Cultural
    Research* 23, no. 4. (2019): 381–395; Limor Shifman, “An Anatomy of
    a Youtube Meme,” *New Media and Society* 14, no. 2 (2012): 187 –
    203; and Heidi E. Huntington, “Subversive Memes: Internet Memes as a
    Form of Visual Rhetoric,” *AoIR Selected Papers of Internet
    Research* (2013).

[^25chapter24_2]: Anushka Kulkarni, “Internet Meme and Political Discourse: A study
    on the Impact of Internet Meme as a Tool in Communicating Political
    Satire,” *Journal of Content, Community & Communication Amity School
    of Communication* 6 (2017): 13; and Giselinde Kuipers, “‘Where Was
    King Kong When We Needed Him?’ Public Discourse, Digital Disaster
    Jokes, and the Functions of Laughter After 9/11,” *The Journal of
    American Culture* 28, no. 1 (2005): 80.

[^25chapter24_3]: Glitsos and James, “The Pepe the Frog Meme,” 285, citing from
    “Pepe Cartoonist Kills off Character That Became Hate symbol,”
    *Australian Broadcasting Corporation,* May 9, 2017 retrieved from
    http:// <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-09/pepe-cartoonist">www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-09/pepe-cartoonist</a>
    -kills-off-character-that-became-hate-symbol/8509280.

[^25chapter24_4]: Know Your Meme, “Pepe the Frog - Pepe Timeline,” last updated
    2015. <a href="https://knowyourmeme">https://knowyourmeme</a>. com/photos/942029-pepe-the-frog; Glitsos
    and James, “The Pepe the Frog Meme: An Examination of Social,
    Political, and Cultural Implications through the Tradition of the
    Darwinian Absurd,” 284.

[^25chapter24_5]: Dale Beran, “4chan: The Skeleton Key to the Rise of Trump,”
    *Medium*, February 14, 2017, https:// ^5^
    <a href="http://medium.com/@DaleBeran/4chan-the-skeleton-key-to-the-rise-of-trump-624e7cb798cb">medium.com/@DaleBeran/4chan-the-skeleton-key-to-the-rise-of-trump-624e7cb798cb</a>.

[^25chapter24_6]: Piia Varis, and Jan Blommaert, “Conviviality and Collectives on
    Social Media: Virality, Memes, And New Social Structures,”
    *Multilingual Margins: A Journal of Multilingualism from the
    Periphery* 2, no. 1 (2015): 36.

[^25chapter24_7]: Richard Bauman and Charles L. Briggs, “Poetics and Performance as
    Critical Perspectives on Language and Social Life,” *Annual Review
    of Anthropology* 19 (1990): 73.

[^25chapter24_8]: Irene Theodoropoulou, “Mediatized Vernacularization: On the
    Structure, Entextualization and Resemiotization of Varoufakiology,”
    *Discourse, Context & Media* 14 (2016): 28–39.

[^25chapter24_9]: Colin Lankshear and Michele Knobel, *New Literacies : Everyday
    Practices and Classroom Learning*, 2nd ed. (Maidenhead: Open
    University Press, 2006,) 208.

[^25chapter24_10]: Naam Ngon Geoi Sii \[南岸居⼠\], “‘Zhongli’ De
    Yuanzui「中⽴」的原罪, ” \[The Sin of Neutrality\] *Standnews,*
    February 29, 2020.
    <a href="https://www.thestandnews.com/politics/%E4%B8%AD%E7%AB%8B-">https://www.thestandnews.com/politics/%E4%B8%AD%E7%AB%8B-</a>
    %E7%9A%84%E5%8E%9 F%E7%BD%AA/, and “點樣同啲中⽴撚對話? How to Talk
    With Neutral Retard?” *LIHKG*, last modified August 12, 2019,
    <a href="https://lihkg.com/thread/1459016/page/1">https://lihkg.com/thread/1459016/page/1</a>.

[^25chapter24_11]: Varis, and Blommaert, “Conviviality and Collectives on Social
    Media,” 36.

[^25chapter24_12]: Victor, Daniel. “Hong Kong Protesters Love Pepe the Frog. No,
    They’re Not Alt-Right,” *The New York Times*. August 19, 2019.
    Retrieved from <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/">https://www.nytimes.com/</a>
    2019/08/19/world/asia/hong-kong-protest-pepe-frog.html.

[^25chapter24_13]: Victor, “Hong Kong Protesters,” 2019

[^25chapter24_14]: Christina Ko, “How Pepe the Frog became face of Hong Kong
    protests – despite cartoon being a symbol of 15 hate in US,” *South
    China Morning Post*, August 17, 2019,
    <a href="https://www.scmp.com/lifestyle/arts-culture/article/">https://www.scmp.com/lifestyle/arts-culture/article/</a>
    3023060/how-pepe-frog-became-face-hong-kong-protests-despite-cartoon;
    and Gina Echevarria, “How This Frog Meme Became a Symbol of Hope and
    Hate,” *Insider*, October 8, 2020, <a href="https://www.businessinsider.com/">https://www.businessinsider.com/</a>
    pepe-frog-meme-hate-symbol-hope-hong-kong-protesters-2019-10?r=DE&IR=T.

[^25chapter24_15]: Beran, “4chan: The Skeleton Key to the Rise of Trump,” 2017.

[^25chapter24_16]: Sirpa Leppänen, Samu Kytölä, Henna Jousmäki, Saija Peuronen, and
    Elina Westinen, “Entextualization and Resemiotization As Resources
    for Identification in Social Media,” in *The Language of Social
    Media: Identity and Community on the Internet,* ed. Seargeant,
    Philip, and Caroline Tagg, (London, 2014), 112-114.

[^25chapter24_17]: Bauman and Briggs, “Poetics and Performance as Critical
    Perspectives on Language and Social Life,” 73.

[^25chapter24_18]: Kulkarni, “Internet Meme and Political Discourse: A study on the
    Impact of Internet Meme as a Tool in ^20^ Communicating Political
    Satire,13; and Kuipers, “‘Where Was King Kong When We Needed Him?’,”
    80.
