---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# The Contagious Other: Virality and Anxiety in Congolese Memes\
\
Lesley Nicole Braun

![Afbeelding met persoon, person, binnen Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image1.png){width="1.707182852143482in"
height="2.044199475065617in"}

Figure 1 caption translation: Have you protected yourself? The wearing
of dirty bills on one’s face resonates with current global mask
mandates, as expressed in the caption's call to 'protect yourself.'[^28chapter27_1]
[]{#_heading=h.30yem6yaiht8 .anchor}

Two banknotes cover the mouth and eyes of a Congolese young man who is
seated in front of a religious poster made in China. His shirt is
emblazoned with the flag of Zaire – the Democratic Republic of Congo’s
former name under the three-decade dictatorship of Mobutu Sese Seko. The
caption: "Have you protected yourself? I have". He is a meme-maker.
Viral content like memes offer a unique way to understand how cultural,
political and economic phenomena register with people. The meme at
figure 1 is one example that points to the ambivalence people express
regarding the past and future as well as their position within global
markets. Landlocked in the heart of the African continent, the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has been continuously striving to
breach its borders and connect to the wider global community. Yet as
infrastructural transformations offer promises of connectivity,
anxieties surface around the vulnerability that comes with that
connection.

Coltan is a rare metal prehistorically deposited in the DRC’s veins that
now pumps through cell phones and car batteries, but with such a
blessing comes the curse of hungry foreign investors. Like the rest of
the world, mobile phone technology is becoming integral to the lived
reality of the Congolese people. Though still a nascent market, in 2020
there were an estimated 35.13 million mobile connections, equivalent to
40% of the DRC’s total population[^28chapter27_2]. The situation in the DRC presents
a two-way flow, where the inner viscera of mobile technologies flow out
of the country while the final realization of its commodity form flows
back in. This dual movement is sometimes aligned, other times in
opposition, or both simultaneously. One stark expression of this
phenomenon is seen in the dual movement of biological and memetic
virality.

For people whose lives are doubly affected by this extraction and
consumption, one possible avenue of escape is the content they consume
and share: information, images, memes; a new visual language engendered
and enabled through the very technology rearranging the earth beneath
their feet. It is in this act that Congolese citizens can recapture a
piece of these signs and codes for their own narratives and politics.

As older forms of expression and communication employ new technologies,
they impose their own pre-digital memetic force. Viral content interacts
with other modes of communication, such as rumour, which has been used
to convey opinions about biological viral outbreaks like Ebola and now
Covid-19. The parallel viralities of pathogens and (mis)information is
lost on few. As China takes the spotlight in discussions about 5G
cellular technology, metonymies metastasize into memetic narratives and
alternate realities. With this technological potential come new
anxieties mirroring the movement of discovery and extraction, which are
especially apparent in countries that are brought into global mining
networks.

I draw here on ethnographic research conducted in the capital city of
Kinshasa in collaboration with Ribio Nzeza, a professor of Communication
at the University of Kinshasa. Our findings point to how people
circulating texts, images, and memes can disturb structural power. But
the open channels, the overflow of signs, the collapse of context—these
can also be a contagious force driving breakdown of the social
order.[^28chapter27_3]

One kind of imagery or visual code impregnated with a force unique to
DRC are its memes. Here, we move from virality to virility, an
overabundance of life. There’s a focus on the corporeality of African
bodies, both in their mythological locality, and their eternal
affirmations as spiritual cosmologies. These memes, carried anonymously
by internet infrastructures, are another connection between the
individual and the collective, and between the DRC and the world.

![Afbeelding met tekst, persoon, krant, schermafbeelding Automatisch
gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image2.png){width="2.0708333333333333in"
height="2.448611111111111in"}

Figure 2 caption translation: When you’re left with only 50f to send 50
texts and Airtel asks you if you want to make a donation of 50f to the
government for the fight against covid-19. The specific “when you’re…”
opening text and the two-panel image follow familiar meme structures.
Meanwhile, one needs to think twice before deciding if this is a meme,
an ad or a PSA. Meme courtesy of Socier officiel (Instagram)

## Digital Divide and Control\

The West Africa Cable System (WACS) is a submarine fibre-optic cable
that provides bandwidth to much of Africa. Implemented in 2012, the DRC
was only connected to WACS about a year after this date, with the help
of Chinese foreign investment due to a lack of in-country funding.
Currently, approximately 70% of the African continent’s IT spine has
been built by Huawei, a Chinese telecom giant. Information shared
between African people must ride Chinese information highways via
detours through European data centres, which means that streaming video
comes with a slight lag. Such gaps in time undergo compound expansion as
more people have become dependent on stable internet connections due to
the pandemic. Consequently, Huawei has offered to strengthen the DRC’s
national backbone network with 5G technology.[^28chapter27_4]

News of China’s investments should not suggest that the DRC has reached
an equitable distribution of connectivity. This country, roughly two
thirds the size of western Europe, is home to an estimated population of
89 million people, many of whom survive on \$2 USD a day. The digital
divide is still massive in this vast land and it is difficult to discern
how many people are actually online, as quantitative research regarding
online activity in the DRC is scant. This said, people are drawn to
online culture like everyone else, chronicling their lives through
digital images. They are becoming meme producers — jokes, statements,
and outrages get the infinitely shareable translation to become
collective expressions. Images are replicable and modifiable, sacred and
desecrated — and always with the potential to become a weapon turned
against the self qua creator, sharer, witness. For this reason, posters
of most memes circulating in, and around, the DRC remain anonymous. This
is true both within the country’s borders and among members of its
diaspora.

The Congolese State is not unaware of the destabilizing potential of
digital democracy: this decade has been marked by periods of civil
protest, and the people know all-too-well that internet blackouts are
one of the government's first lines of attack against “unruly” masses.
And of course, more traditional censorship is also part of its arsenal.
So long as the internet is running, the anonymity provided by social
media platforms will be both where and how you critique power and
organize political movements.

Viral content in the DRC interacts with a longer history of orality and
rumour, as well as political cartoons. During the colonial era when the
DRC was oppressed by Belgium, cartoons and popular paintings were
communicative genres instrumental in the struggle for independence,[^28chapter27_5]
and in postcolonial settings they are mediums that covertly and
sometimes explicitly mock and challenge gross abuses of power.[^28chapter27_6] Like
rumours, memes assume new meaning as they circulate. Building on Achille
Mbembe’s provocation that “rumour is the poor-man’s bomb”,[^28chapter27_7] Frances
Nyamnjoh draws parallels between rumour and cartoons in the context of
neighbouring Cameroon, foreshadowing what would later form part of
contemporary discussions about alternative sources of truth. He writes,
“Both political rumour and cartooning, it could be argued, are ways of
cushioning the hardness of the crushing and stifling official discourse
that monopolised the public sphere, often claiming to be the sole bearer
of truth.”[^28chapter27_8] With the advent of new technology and the diminishing
importance of print newspapers in the DRC, memes — specifically image
macros (that is, images captioned with text, blending magazine graphic
art, print ads and single-panel comics) — are considered 2.0 versions of
cartoons. Memes are visual forms shaped by people’s concrete
experiences, even as they are expressed with the raw visual material
circulating in abstract and proprietary spaces. Moreover, in becoming a
generative medium through which to discuss politics, they reshape lives
and in turn form a continuous productive-consumptive loop.

## The Appeal of Memes\

As a mechanism of critique, subversive memes hold fascination both in
their content as well as for the suspenseful thrill of following the
reaction to — or of evading consequences for — a given meme. Figure 3,
for instance, is a meme that points to the government’s involvement with
extractive capital. The head of Kabila Kamambe, the president of the DRC
from 2001 to 2019, is photoshopped onto the body of a woman and ‘quoted’
as saying: “I am Kabila Kamambe, a mediocre prostitute sent from
Rwanda.” The rubber boots are suggestive of the country’s eastern region
where many of the mines are located. Here we have a combination of
corrupt politicians, resource extraction, and the figurative
"prostitute" who, in this context, uses their body to monetarily gain
from a presumably wealthier and more powerful entity. This sort of print
cartoon would land a cartoonist in jail, but as it was anonymously
created and circulated online, it could not lead the authorities to hold
any individual accountable. Still, simply viewing it or having it on a
phone can give one a thrill of being a transgressive dissident.

![Afbeelding met kleding, persoon, poseren, wapenrusting Automatisch
gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image3.png){width="1.5972222222222223in"
height="2.1534722222222222in"}

Figure 3 caption translation: “I am Kabila Kamambe, a mediocre
prostitute sent from Rwanda.”

Although some may argue that this symbolic act of transgression only
deflates the pressure toward material action, a more likely assumption
is that the circulation of political memes complicates the sources,
avenues, targets and consequences of political criticism. This is
largely since memes can be light-hearted as well as grave, coming at us
as a fast-flow of images, perhaps even dulling us to these non-sequitur
effects. From serious critiques of state or corporate politics, to ludic
takes on social norms, it all blends into a comfy background rhythm of
signs and expressions.

Take the highly meme’d pose (Figures 4 and 5) in which a woman carries
an adult male using the familiar back sling normally used for babies.
The grown man sucks his thumb or grins like a proud brat — the humorous
intention apparent to all. However, such a meme also depends on the
viewer being “in the know” regarding the context of the sling, of
Congolese marital relations, of the infantility of men within domestic
materiality, etc.Knowing this, the consumptive rewards are that much
more “worth it.” The question again is: Will such mocking images result
into true societal self-criticism? Or by making light of these issues,
will they temper any call to change?

![Afbeelding met binnen, persoon, muur Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image4.png){width="2.0493055555555557in"
height="2.7319444444444443in"} ![Afbeelding met tekst, persoon
Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image5.png){width="2.20625in"
height="2.9055555555555554in"}

Figures 4 & 5: Two examples of a popular meme depicting a man in a
traditional sling normally used to carry babies.

This ambiguity brought on by political memes renders it difficult to
locate a single source of unchallenged power. Rather, we have a
carnivalesque commentary on the arbitrariness of authority. Whether it
is the outright mocking of politicians (as in Figure 3), or playfully
remixing familiar scenes of male-female/parent-child roles (Figures 4
and 5), the primary aim of these images is to make people laugh. Yet,
there remains the danger of the two-way nature of meme production and
consumption: one laughs at power, only for that laughter to become
redirected at one’s own lack of power. We become both subjects of agency
and objects of ridicule.

In this way, these memes echo what scholars have said of the role of
print cartoons: “Laughter frequently adopts a self-reflexive mode
through which those subject to power mock their own powerlessness and
lack of agency in the face of a system that they perceive as
immutable”.[^28chapter27_9] The self-reflexive laughter, always teetering at the
edge of irony, is therefore a coping mechanism.

![Afbeelding met tekst, auto, schermafbeelding Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image6.png){width="2.584722222222222in"
height="2.584722222222222in"}

Figure 6 caption translation from left to right: “Politicians, wives of
politicians, sons of politicians, voters.” The instant you get the joke
about the corruption of politicians, you’re immediately forced to
confront your own poverty and powerlessness. Thisenforces the coping
mechanism of self-reflexive laughter at your sorry lot and its causes
(namely the greedy ruling classes).

Sometimes, universality is eschewed for more granular in-group
identification. The virality of certain memes or videos depend on their
capacity to communicate a select group’s situations and ideas, which is
often accomplished at the expense of some “other” (such othered figures
will haunt this paper further down). And in the shared feeling of
identity, community, and nationality, these memes create an imaginary
universal set of shared interests.[^28chapter27_10] The meme in Figure 6 was
particularly popular among Congolese Facebook groups, but more so for
those now living in Europe than within the DRC’s borders. The
three-panel image macro describes the state of surveillance in three
different contexts. The U.S-China rivalry is here flattened to similar
states using high-tech CCTV cameras. Both are contrasted to the final
panel: a neighbourhood in Kinshasa. The meme’s appeal resides in how it
emits self-essentialized caricatures of Congolese culture: perhaps
low-tech, but more personal.

![Afbeelding met tekst, buiten, krant Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image7.png){width="1.8756944444444446in"
height="2.786111111111111in"}

Figure 6 caption translation: “Surveillance cameras, America, China,
Lingwala” (a neighbourhood in Kinshasa). Again, the joke is based on the
material inequalities between the richer countries and poorer Africa,
while at the same time reminding/rewarding “in-the-know” viewers through
a sense of personal community-interest lacking in the
techno-surveillance states of “advanced” countries*. *

## Made in China\

International media often criticizes China’s manoeuvring as a
neo-colonial power in Africa (though some would say that China is merely
following the logic of global capitalism). In many African countries,
little to no local industry exists, and affordable Chinese goods are the
only choice. Pejorative terms like “Fong Kong'' in Southern Africa and
“Chinoiserie” in Francophone Africa express people’s disappointment with
the quality of the products that saturate their lives. A common joke in
the DRC: A Chinese man marries a Congolese woman and has a baby. The
baby dies and everyone cries except the Congolese woman’s father, who
says: “Nothing Chinese-made lasts very long.”

In memes too, Chinese presence on the African continent is made visible.
One finds the expected light-hearted provocations about cultural
stereotypes, such as Figure 13. This meme depicts a Chinese-owned shop
in the DRC featuring a mannequin that mimics stereotypical Congolese
silhouettes, with the text pointing to China’s propensity to make
knockoffs of anything. These images work their way into everyday
conversations, sometimes causing debate.

![Afbeelding met tekst Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image8.png){width="1.4673611111111111in"
height="2.109027777777778in"}

Figure 13 caption translation: (left) “Chinese don’t miss anything! They
made a Congolese mannequin.”

The circulation of people, products and memes has given rise to a
multiplication of conspiracy theories across the African continent.
Figure 14 presents us with a photoshopped image of a Chinese man
grabbing African women’s breasts. Is this legitimate or fake news,
propaganda or just a troll? What backlash can it cause if interpreted as
legitimate?

![Afbeelding met tekst, buiten, persoon, strand Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image9.png){width="2.2895833333333333in"
height="2.598611111111111in"}

Figure 14 caption translation: “Here is what this poor Chinese man is
doing in the quarries with miners.”

## A Me(r)maid’s Tale

Creative genres incorporating text and image (popular art, print ads and
print cartoons) draw from oral histories, folkloric tales, and rumours
of their cultures. These archives of popular history are now being
worked into memes. For instance, the mystical siren *Mami Wata* is a
recurring folkloric motif across Africa, appearing in Congolese
paintings. Between the 1950s and 1970s these paintings portrayed her
donning a wrist watch, an imprint of colonial power. The appearance of
this aspirational symbol came at a time when people were experiencing an
inflow of new consumer commodities (Figures 9,10,11), themselves symbols
of the times changing. Clock-time is also symbolic of the rigid
organization of daily life so necessary to capitalist modes of
production.

![Afbeelding met tekst, geschilderd Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image10.png){width="2.7680555555555557in"
height="1.5576388888888888in"} ![Afbeelding met tekst, oud, fotolijstje,
vintage Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image11.png){width="1.195138888888889in"
height="1.5534722222222221in"} ![Afbeelding met tekst, oud, steen
Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image12.png){width="2.4722222222222223in"
height="1.8590277777777777in"}

Figures 7, 8, and 9: Mami Wata wearing a wrist watch.

Since the colonial period, people have told of encounters with Mami
Wata, who is depicted as a siren, an irresistible temptress. In exchange
for loyalty or a sacrifice, she offers men material wealth and success.
Wealthy men are sometimes perceived as having made pacts with Mami Wata,
especially if people cannot directly infer their line of work or the
source of their financial success. One commonly hears, “azalaka na mwasi
ya Mami Wata, mbongo naye eza mystique” (he has a Mami Wata, his money
is mystical). These perceived suspicious and dubious sources of wealth
are considered immoral because they are linked to occult forces that
have been harnessed in their acquisition. Mami Wata is deeply connected
to material excess, luring hapless suitors with the trappings of the
modern capitalist world. In this way, her serpentine nature connects
with the Edenic serpent of the Bible, beguiling humans with sweet and
shiny things into the modern world of work, pain, and suffering. Now,
this sea serpentess swims alongside information and rumours through
digital channels. Men are warned about online romantic liaisons with
digital sirens. With new channels come new monsters and anxieties.

One story of Mami Wata surfaced in 2012 when Chinese engineers were
installing underwater internet cables in the Congo River.[^28chapter27_11]
Complications bred rumours of something fishy. Then, they caught Her. A
video of captured Mami Wata went viral and eventually aired on national
television. How could Mami Wata, so ancient and mysterious, be captured
by the Chinese? Chinese people had to become the exotic “other”,
powerful enough to catch this supernatural creature that was disturbing
the connection between Congo’s cables and a broader network.[^28chapter27_12]

The ways Mami Wata and digital culture circulate demonstrate how the
internet is a vehicle for encounters with otherness. Further, both
expressions are inter-participatory: their meanings coexist in constant
evolution. Parallels can also be made between the virality of memes and
Mami Wata’s memetic force, in that they are mutable and shapeshifting,
both inspiring myths that coalesce into rumours and back again. The
cultural feedback loop in which Mami Wata swims has her constantly
chasing her own fin.

As circulation accelerates — of people, commodities, images, ideas —
proximities will breed new anxieties as well as new potentialities. The
ambiguity between anxiety and triviality immanent to internet technology
infects our relationships, especially to the “other”. Mobile and
internet technology only expands the unprotected spaces where others can
infect you. In the DRC, mobile-phone technology has provoked concerns
about new social forms of intimacy, which then slip into suspicions
about spiritual foul play. Since with a mobile one is always reachable,
one is always vulnerable to the social “other”.

One circulating rumour across Africa and Asia involved a tale of people
killed after answering an unknown telephone number[^28chapter27_13]— like getting a
computer virus when you download a file. This rumour reveals the
anxieties associated with the overlapping dynamics of social
connectivity, globalisation, and local ontologies of the supernatural.
Further, there are some underlying assumptions here to do with local
forms of African witchcraft. Writing in the context of South Africa,
Jean and John Comaroff suggest that witchcraft in Africa can be thought
of as, “etiological principles which translate structural
contradictions, experiential anomalies, and aporiahs \[sic\]— force
fields of greater complexity than is normally implied by ‘‘class
struggle’’—into the argot of human agency, of interpersonal kinship, of
morality and passion.”[^28chapter27_14] The form that witchcraft often takes in the
DRC and other African countries relates to intimacy and trust.[^28chapter27_15] In
other words, the people within one's social networks have the potential
of doing you the most harm. Witches can act unconsciously, unaware that
they are inflicting harm on others. These supernatural forces now
circulate in the digital realm, as even those closest to you can be
conduits sharing viruses (biological or computational) or exposing you
to anxiety-inducing viral content.

Local ontologies of enchantment, magic, and the sacred strengthen the
idea that images themselves are virulent, infecting people’s minds on a
literal level. For instance, it is not uncommon for a person to say: “Do
not infect my phone with that video of yours. I do not want to be
contaminated by those images.” With regards to the Mami Wata viral
video, people were reluctant to save it on their phones, fearing its
mystical quality could infect the viewer through its communication. With
memes, the passage from information to persuasion to manipulation is
optimized, as depicted in Figure 10 in which a young man is washing his
brain, trying to make it clean again.

![Afbeelding met persoon, buiten Automatisch gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image13.png){width="2.147222222222222in"
height="2.6777777777777776in"}

Figure 10 caption translation: “Tag a friend who needs to have his brain
washed” Though the term brainwashing directly translates in French as
“lavage de cerveau”, this meme also refers to having a dirty mind. Meme
courtesy of Starjirexmedia (Instagram)

## Self-Mockery as Defence\

Supernatural content in memes can also be light-hearted, and not
perceived as sinister. Consider the rooster in Figure 11, standing at
attention among a roll call of uniformed soldiers. The French caption
reads, “When you are a witch and forget to transform yourself back in
the morning.” Like many great memes, the humour operates at several
different levels: the common meme “TMW” setup, the witch’s
forgetfulness, the in-feeling of getting the mystical significance, a
poke at militarism, and the gesture of Congolese self-mockery in which
the idea of a witch’s presence is an uncanny, yet plausible one.

![Afbeelding met tekst, persoon, militair uniform, poseren Automatisch
gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image14.png){width="2.348611111111111in"
height="2.4194444444444443in"}

Figure 11 caption translation: “When you’re a witch and you forget to
transform yourself in the morning.” This follows the familiar “that
moment when…” (TMW) structure very common in memes.

“Sorcier officiel,” or ‘Witch official,’ is a profile on Instagram
devoted to francophone African memes (Fig 12). The account handle is an
ironic nod to African witchcraft, but also to the bureaucratic humour of
writing from a witch’s “official” account (as if it is run by witch
interns). Sorcier officiel’s popularity signals the bewitching quality
of being a meme creator, charged with the task of sending out images to
infect our minds.

![Afbeelding met tekst, persoon, krant, schermafbeelding Automatisch
gegenereerde
beschrijving](media/image15.png){width="2.015277777777778in"
height="2.4229166666666666in"}

Figure 12 caption translation: “The moment when your phone is charging
and you start to think about your future.” Again, there is that “TMW”
structure. Meme courtesy of Socier officiel (Instagram)

## Enchanted Horizons\

As the reality of a biological virus dominates our material lives, its
media dominates our airwaves and bandwidth. The next decade’s struggle
over internet politics will usher in its own ideological battles, and
mapping the pressure points of geopolitical anxieties can reveal the
moving intersections between biological and technological virality. The
digital image of Mami Wata, that captured mythical siren — horrid and
scared in a bright white room, surrounded by prodding engineers —
surfaced during a moment when connectivity was on the horizon. Congolese
people have long understood the potency of images, and their power to
spread, infect and manipulate. Dichotomies between the state and “the
people”, as well as China and the “rest” are not clearly discernible,
and alliances between different actors and entities create new
complexities in terms of both cooperation and emergent antagonisms.

As memes continue to circulate around the world, people in the global
north, are (re)discovering the enchantment of images, a force that had
long been ascribed to irrational worldviews of the “other”. Now memes
delight and perhaps even unite us as they circulate on our slick and
well-branded devices. And in the political realm they have proven to
translate their virality into tools of power struggles. However, as our
world becomes more connected and infected, we should say: it is not so
much a short-circuiting by the “other”, but a crashing of a horizon
between worlds. []{#_heading=h.e9n79haffyre .anchor}

## References

Adejuwon, Akin, and Shina Alimi. “Cartoons as Illustration: Political
Process in Nigeria.” *The Journal of Pan-African Studies* 4 (2011):
57-76.

Anderson, Benedict R. *Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
and Spread of Nationalism*. London: Verso Editions, 1983.

Braun, Lesley Nicole, and Ribio Nzeza Bunketi Buse. “Infectious Images:
Viral Internet Content in the Democratic Republic of Congo.” *Critical
Arts* 34, no, 4 (2020): 103-116.

Braun, Lesley Nicole. “Cyber Siren: What Mami Wata Reveals about the
Internet and Chinese Presence in Kinshasa.” *Journal of Canadian African
Studies* 49, no. 2 (2015): 301-318.

Bonhomme, Julien. “Les numéros de téléphone portable qui tuent.
Epidemiologie Culturelle d’une rumeur transnationale.” *Tracés* 21
(2011): 125–150.

Comaroff, Jean and John. “Alien-Nation: Zombies, Immigrants, and
Millennial Capitalism.” *Atlantic Quarterly* 101, no. 4 (2002): 779-804.

Fiston Frequencemagic, “chinios akangi mami wata na congo,” YouTube
video, April 28, 2012, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h80Tchh15%5C_E">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h80Tchh15\_E</a>.

Gecshiere, Peter. *Witchcraft, Intimacy, and Trust: Africa in
Comparison*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013.

Kemp, Simon, “Digital 2020: The Democratic Republic of the Congo.” Last
Modified February 17, 2020.
<a href="https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020-democratic-republic-of-the-congo">https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020-democratic-republic-of-the-congo</a>

Willems, Wendy. “Comic Strips and “the crisis”: Postcolonial Laughter
and Coping with Everyday Life in Zimbabwe.” *Popular Communication* 9,
no. 2 (2011): 126–145[]{#_heading=h.g89hph4tumt2
.anchor}.[[]{#_heading=h.7twaor8buis8 .anchor}]{#_heading=h.1ptu7j3wbnxi
.anchor}

[^28chapter27_1]: While the identities of the meme sources/creators are difficult to
    pin down, those that are known have been intentionally kept
    anonymous (unless otherwise indicated) due to ethical issues
    relating to censorship concerns in the DRC.

[^28chapter27_2]: Simon Kemp, “Digital 2020: the Democratic Republic of the Congo”,
    last Modified February 17, 2020,
    <a href="https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020-democratic-republic-of-the-congo">https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020-democratic-republic-of-the-congo</a>.

[^28chapter27_3]: Lesley Nicole Braun and Ribio Bunketi Buse Nzeza “Infectious
    Images: Viral Internet Content in the Democratic Republic of Congo,”
    *Critical Arts* 34, no. 4 (2020): 103-116.

[^28chapter27_4]: Paul Budde, “Democratic Republic of Congo - Telecoms, Mobile and
    Broadband - Statistics and Analyses,” *Research and Markets,*
    September 2020, <a href="https://www.researchandmarkets.com">https://www.researchandmarkets.com</a>

[^28chapter27_5]: Akin Adejuwon and Shina Alimi, “Cartoons as Illustration:
    Political Process in Nigeria,” *The Journal of Pan-African Studies*
    4 (2011): 57.

[^28chapter27_6]: Francis Nyamanjoh, “Press Cartoons and Politics: The Case of
    Cameroon,” in *Cartooning in*

    *Africa*, ed. J.A. Lent (Cresskill: Hampton Press, 2009), 97–111.

[^28chapter27_7]: Achille Mbembe, “The Thing and its Double in Cameroonian
    Cartoons,” in *Readings in African*

    *Popular Culture*, ed. Karin Baber (Bloomington: Indiana University
    Press, 1997), 151–163.

[^28chapter27_8]: Francis Nyamanjoh, “Press Cartoons and Politics: The Case of
    Cameroon,” in *Cartooning in*

    *Africa*, ed. J.A. Lent (Cresskill: Hampton Press, 2009), 99.

[^28chapter27_9]: Wendy Willems, “Comic Strips and ‘the Crisis’: Postcolonial
    Laughter and Coping with Everyday Life in Zimbabwe,” *Popular
    Communication* 9, no. 2 (2011): 16.

[^28chapter27_10]: Benedict R. Anderson, *Imagined Communities: Reflections on the
    Origin and Spread of Nationalism* (London: Verso Editions,1983).

[^28chapter27_11]: Lesley Braun “Cyber Siren: What Mami Wata Reveals about the
    Internet and Chinese Rresence in Kinshasa,” *Journal of Canadian
    African Studies* 49, no. 2 (2015): 301-318.

[^28chapter27_12]: Fiston Frequencemagic, “chinios akangi mami wata na congo,”
    YouTube video, April 28, 2012,
    <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h80Tchh15%5C_E">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h80Tchh15\_E</a>

[^28chapter27_13]: Julien Bonhomme, “Les Numéros de Téléphone Portable qui Tuent.
    Epidemiologie Culturelle d’une Rumeur Transnationale,” *Tracés 21*
    Contagion/Contamination (2011): 125–150.

[^28chapter27_14]: Jean and John Commaroff, “Alien-Nation: Zombies, Immigrants , and
    Millennial Capitalism,” *South Atlantic Quarterly* 101, no. 4
    (2002): 796

[^28chapter27_15]: Peter Geschiere, *Witchcraft, Intimacy, and Trust: Africa in
    Compariso*n (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013).
