---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# **Biographies**

**Abidin Abidin and D. Bondy Valdovinos Kaye**

Crystal Abidin is the founder of the TikTok Cultures Research Network.
She is a digital anthropologist and ethnographer of vernacular internet
cultures, and researches internet celebrity, influencer cultures, and
social media pop cultures. She has published 5 books and over 60
articles and chapters on various aspects of internet cultures. Crystal
is Associate Professor of Internet Studies, Principal Research Fellow,
and ARC DECRA Fellow at Curtin University. For her public scholarship
and continuous engagements with industry, Crystal was listed on ABC Top
5 Humanities Fellows (2020), Forbes 30 Under 30 Asia (2018), and Pacific
Standard 30 Top Thinkers Under 30 (2016). Reach her at
[*wishcrys.com*](http://wishcrys.com/).

D. Bondy Valdovinos Kaye is a postdoctoral fellow at L’Université
Sorbonne Paris Nord, a research associate at Curtin University, and a
sessional researcher at the Digital Media Research Centre at Queensland
University of Technology. His research interests include digital music,
cultural policy, and platform studies. Recently, he has extensively
researched the short video platform, TikTok, with several articles
published in peer-review journals and a book under contract with Polity
Press to be published in 2022. He has also published research on
creative labor in India, digital nationalism in China, and cultural
policy in Myanmar.

**Anirban K. Baishya**

Anirban Baishya is an Assistant Professor at the Communication and Media
Studies Department, Fordham University. His current research examines
selfies and the rise of digital selfhood in India. His research
interests include New Media and Digital Cultures, Social Media &
Politics, Media Aesthetics, Surveillance Studies, and South Asian Film &
Media. His work has been published in *International Journal of
Communication*, *Communication, Culture & Critique*, *South Asian
Popular Culture*, *Porn Studies*, *South Asia: Journal of South Asian
Studies* and *Media, Culture and Society.*

**Aarushi Bapna and Ajitesh Lokhande**

Aarushi Bapna is a visual communicator, designer, and researcher from
India. She graduated with a Bachelor's in Design (Graphic Design) from
the National Institute of Design – Ahmedabad in 2020. Her interests
include critical design, decolonizing design, and designing for social
impact, especially in the realm of the socio-cultural implications of
technology. She is a recipient of the Core77 Speculative Design Award
2020 in recognition of her project ‘Speculative Stories from Shahpur
Jat’.

Ajitesh Lokhande is a graphic designer and visual researcher from India.
He is a graduate of the National Institute of Design – Ahmedabad, with a
specialization in Graphic Design. Originally from Mumbai, India, he
currently works as a brand identity designer and art director based out
of Paris, France. He is deeply interested in transcultural design,
languages, non-western visual cultures, and music. He is a co-author of
the paper ‘Prosumeristic Publications: alt+yd’, a project that explores
the future of phygital publication practices, presented and published in
the DeSForM 2019 conference organized by the MIT Design Lab.

Both Aarushi and Ajtesh are a part of the Critters' Collective.

**Grant Bolmer**

Grant Bollmer is the author of three books, *Inhuman Networks: Social
Media and the Archaeology of Connection* (2016), *Theorizing Digital
Cultures* (2018), and *Materialist Media Theory: An Introduction*
(2019), and is a co-editor, with Yiğit Soncul, of a special issue of the
journal *parallax* on ‘Networked Liminality’ (2020). He is currently
completing a book on the history of technologies used in psychological
research on emotion. He is an Associate Professor of Media Studies at
North Carolina State University, where he teaches in the Department of
Communication and the Ph.D. Program in Communication, Rhetoric, and
Digital Media (CRDM).

**Stephanie Boulding**

Stephanie Boulding is a teller of stories. She is interested in the
psychic togetherness afforded by the Internet as a new communication
medium, and the intimately human stories that emanate from this fact.
Her podcast, Ephemera, is an exploration of stories and theory, an
attempt to situate the Internet and the Online within a framework of
literary criticism. By the grace of God, she is neither an academic nor
a Youtube video essayist.

‘Writers\[…\]are dissatisfied with the books which they could buy but do
not like.’ –Walter Benjamin

**Lesley Braun**

Lesley Nicole Braun is a senior lecturer at the University of Basel at
the Institute of Social Anthropology. Since 2008, she has been
collaborating with researchers in Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (DRC) on various research projects ranging from the world of
popular concert dance, to the transnational movements of women traders
who travel between the DRC and China. Her book, *Congo’s Dancers: Women
and Work in Kinshasa*, forthcoming with the University of Wisconsin
Press, focuses on the ways that popular dance, in its embodied and
symbolic forms, participates in the construction of an urban experience.

**Anthony Burton**


Anthony Glyn Burton is a Ph.D. student and SSHRC Joseph Bombardier Fellow in the Department of Communications at Simon Fraser University. Anthony’s research is broadly concerned with the networked development of epistemologies and ideology in technological and datafied environments. He has published in *First Monday*, the *International Journal of Communications*, the *Canadian Journal of Communications*, and the *Harvard Misinformation Review*. He also co-convenes the Techne/Technics/Technology (3T) reading and research group with the Associação de Pesquisas e Práticas em Humanidades (Porto Alegre). He graduated from Ryerson and York University’s Master of Arts in Communication & Culture, where he wrote his thesis on involuntary celibacy, programmatic epistemology, and masculinity under neoliberalism. He is a researcher at the Digital Democracies Institute, the Infoscape Lab at Ryerson University, and affiliated with the Open Intelligence Lab at the University of Amsterdam. [https://anthbrtn.com](https://anthbrtn.com/).

**Caspar Chan**

Caspar Chan, originally from Macau, is a current Research Master student
of Arts and Culture at the University of Groningen, following the track
of Arts, Media and Literary Studies. His research interests lie in the
relationship between the public sphere and identity construction, along
with politics in popular culture, specifically in the contexts of Macau
and Hong Kong. He studied Applied Musicology (M.A.) at Utrecht
University, and Music Studies (B.A.) at the Hong Kong Baptist
University. Raised as a music scholar and being a keen traveler, he also
writes on music, travel, heritage, and culture on different local and
international platforms, as well as in various journals and newspapers.

**Clusterduck**

[*Clusterduck*](https://clusterduck.space) is a collective working at
the crossroads of research, design and transmedia, focusing on social
media and internet related content. 

**Åke Gafvelin**

Åke Gafvelin is a second year philosophy student at King’s College,
Cambridge. He runs the podcast *The Metaphysical Laboratory* and has
edited the book *Filosofi och Pandemi*, which is a collection of
interviews with Swedish philosophers on the Covid-19 pandemic. Aside
from meme-culture, Åke is interested in metaethics, pragmatism and the
philosophy of religion.

**Idil Galip**

İdil Galip is a writer, researcher and maker. Her work explores the
intersections of digital culture and labour, especially with relation to
online communities. She is currently a PhD candidate in sociology at the
University of Edinburgh, finishing up her thesis titled *Art Worlds
Online: Memes, Labour and Politics*. She is also the founder and
convener of the Meme Studies Research Network. 

**Martin Hanßen**

Martin Hanßen is an art and visual historian. He works as an art
educator for the Berlin State Museums and teaches art history online.
After obtaining his B.A. from AMD Düsseldorf, where he specialized in
costume history and fashion theory, he studied art and visual history at
Humboldt University of Berlin. His research focus is the visual culture
of late medieval and early modern Europe, particularly 15^th^ century
European painting and the origins of reproductive media. Currently, he
investigates the contemporary perception of the Old Masters online and
examines the new conception of late medieval and early modern visual
culture in digital spaces by scrutinizing users’ interaction with and
the migration of digital images of works of art from this period in
network cultures.

**Geoff Hondroudakis**

Geoff Hondroudakis is a researcher in media theory and philosophy of
technology, with a background in literary theory and philosophy.
Currently he is a graduate research student at the University of
Melbourne, where his work examines theories of scale and abstraction in
philosophy and media.

**Max Horwich**

Max Horwich is a musician, designer, teacher and creative technologist
based in Brooklyn, NY. His work explores the intersections of new media
and folk art practices.

**Yasmeen Khaja**

Yasmeen Khaja is a designer and writer based in Kuwait. She currently
works with creative studios including Sharaf Studio and Amna Alsalem.
Previously, she has worked with the organizations Aerial Futures, AIA
NY, SYPartners, the Arab Film & Media Institute, and more. She is
interested in contemplating the overlapping spaces between the internet
and everyday life. Yasmeen holds an MA in Design Research, Writing, and
Criticism from the School of Visual Arts in New York. She was awarded
the Paula Rhodes award for her MA thesis on memes and cultural identity
in Kuwait. She also holds an honors BFA in Graphic Design from the
California College of the Arts.

**Andy King**

Andy King is a media artist and researcher, whose satirical and
political works focus on internet subcultures, loneliness and human
relationships in the digital age. She explores the blurring of borders
between truth and fiction, copy and original, private and public spaces.
King often includes found images and videos in her works, photographing
and manipulating them repeatedly in a way that mimics how information is
disseminated and distorted online. In her free time, she infiltrates
online far-right groups with the goal to investigate and document new
developments, as well as anonymously engage with individual members in
order to deradicalize them.

**Ivan Knapp**

Ivan Knapp was awarded his PhD in the History of Art by University
College London in 2021 for a thesis entitled *Meme-work: Psychoanalysis
and the alt-right*. His research focuses on questions of psychoanalysis
and masculinity.

**Jacob Sujin Kuppermann**

Jacob Sujin Kuppermann is an interdisciplinary researcher and writer
currently living in the San Francisco Bay Area. Their work focuses on
the intersections between ecology and the history of science, with
particular interests in historical ecology, information studies, and
science communication. They also moonlight as a music critic at *The
Singles Jukebox*.

**Anahita Neghabat**

Anahita Neghabat is a Cultural and Social Anthropologist and meme-making
activist from Vienna, Austria. She is currently finishing her MA in
Cultural and Social Anthropology at the University of Vienna, in the
framework of which she also studied at the Gender Studies Department of
the Central European University in Budapest. Anahita is working at the
Institute for Human Sciences (IWM) as Academic Assistant to the Rector,
Shalini Randeria. She is a board member of the *kontexte*.-network, a
non-profit organization that connects and supports students and alumni
of cultural and social science disciplines.

In her online-activist practice Anahita uses memes as a visual
vocabulary, medium and tool for political commentary, reaching a broad
and young audience of over 24 thousand people on Instagram. As
@ibiza\_austrian\_memes she comments on Austrian interior politics with
the aim of intervening in public political discourse from an
intersectional feminist, anti-racist and anti-authoritarian perspective.
Anahita creates and curates memes and posts them along with concise
texts, providing additional background information and offering critical
perspectives in accessible language. She founded her meme page in May
2019 as a reaction to the ‘Ibiza Affair’ in Austria, a political scandal
that caused the collapse of the far-right governing coalition. Anahita
is academically and politically interested in questions of social
justice, postcolonial and decolonial perspectives and approaches, as
well as intersectional feminism, particularly the genderedness of
(anti-Muslim) racism in Austria and Central Europe.

**Sarp Özer**

Sarp Özer is a curator and researcher working in the field of
contemporary art. He is the director of programs at AVTO, a cultural
organization located in Istanbul. His research focuses on the role of
digital affordances in engineering public opinion. Özer contributed to
publications of L'Internazionale, SALT.TXT, Arter and so-far. He is
among the producers of the Ahali Conversations, a podcast series
inquiring on the future of cultural production by Can Altay.

**Saeeda Saeed**

Visual activist Saeeda Saeed has spent the last number of years
developing guerrilla communication platforms that transgress Saudi
state-controlled media. Her practice collectivizes power through
incremental, joint collaborations with self-organized microstructures
within her community. In 2015, Saeed set up a series of DIY Pirate Radio
networks in tandem with underground musicians, erotic poets, nudist
artists, members of the LGBTQIA community, and illegal immigrants
transmitting over 270 hours of alternative narratives within the
kingdom.

In her residency at the Jan van Eyck Academy, Saeed looks at different
manifestations of her identity as an activist injecting play,
performance, fiction and movement. In her more recent work, Saeed
pivoted to design interventions within Twitter in response to recent
legislations that reconstituted ‘the act of retweeting narratives that
go against the state or religion’ as an act of terrorism. Saeed devised
a series of counter posting strategies to drown out official state-run
tweets and allow users to safely mask their IP locations. Among them is
an Instant Meme Noise Reactor (2020), an object that spits out
nonsensical, humorous insults to state-run accounts each time they post
and a Portable Clickfarm (2019) that utilizes physical movement and the
human body as a disruptive tool in gaining digital autonomy.

Saeed is currently working on WILD DAUGHTERS: A queer online publication
developed in collaboration with two Saudi female activists. Saeed was
awarded The Hartwig Art Production prize | Collection Fund special
project 2020-21, for the acquisition of new artworks to be acquired by
the Hartwig Art Fund and donated to the Dutch national art collection.

**Laurence Scherz**

Laurence Scherz (°1989, Belgium) is a writer, translator, tattoo artist,
and meme lover. She currently works for The Hmm, platform for internet
cultures. Aside from this, she's writing her first collection of short
stories, ranging from tales of feminism fairy tales to dystopian,
speculative fiction, and magic realism. One time, a boss asked her what
a meme was, and she's never been more enthusiastic about anything ever
since.  

**The Trans Bears**

The Trans Bears are two gender non-conforming people of American and
German-American origin, based in Philadephia and London. As artists,
comedians and academics, they are interested in the radical potential of
lols and using them to jinx the constraints of consensus reality.

**Marc Tuters**

X

**Sabrina Ward-Kimola**

Sabrina Ward-Kimola is a Research Associate with the Infoscape Lab. She
is currently a student at Ryerson/York’s joint program in Communication
and Culture. She holds a SSHRC-funded position at Concordia’s PhD in
Communication, and will be working with the Access in-the-making (AIM)
Lab starting in September 2021. She is writing her thesis on the digital
writing and interpretation practices of American Sign Language poets in
North America. Her more general research interests include critical
theory, post-hermeneutics, virtual embodiment and platform
infrastructures.

**Scott Wark**

Scott Wark is a Research Fellow for the Wellcome-funded project, People
Like You: Contemporary Figures of Personalisation. He is based at the
Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies at the University of Warwick.
He researches online culture, amongst other things.
